
# Ace of Spades



eg Denman speaking on " bill for abolishing death punishment in cases of forgery, June 4, 1821 "
https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1821/jun/04/forgery-punishment-mitigation-bill
HANSARD 1803–2005 → 1820s → 1821 → June 1821 → 4 June 1821 → Commons Sitting
FORGERY PUNISHMENT MITIGATION BILL.
HC Deb 04 June 1821 vol 5 cc1099-1141099
On the order of the day for the third reading of this bill.

https://archive.org/details/statutesatlarge55britgoog/page/381/mode/1up?q=%22Stamp+act%22
1804J Anno regi quadragenmo quarto Georgii III C. 98. 381 [Geo. III, 44]
IX. And be it further enacted, That if any person or Persons whatosever shallforge or counterfeit, or cause or procure to be forged or counterfeited, any mark, stamp, or die, which shall be provided, made, or used in pursuance of this act, or shall counterfeit or resemble, or cause or procure to be counterfeited or resembled, the impresion of any such mark, stamp, or die, upon any vellum, parchment, paper, or other material, or upon any other matter or thing, or the impresion of the stamp or die, upon any vellum, parchment, or paper, allowed to be issued, used, or applied under the authority of this act, thereby to defraud his Majesty, his heirs or successors, of any of the duties by this act charged or imposed, or if any person or persons shall utter, vend, or sell, any vellum, parchment, paper, or other material, or other matter or thing, with such forged or counterfeit mark, stamp, or impression thereupon, knowing such mark, stamp, or impression to be forged or counterfeit, every such person so offending, being thereof convicted in due form of law, shall be judged a felon, and shall suffer death, as in cases of felony, without benefit of clergy.


https://archive.org/details/statutesatlarge55britgoog/page/436/mode/2up?q=%22Stamp+act%22
Playing-Cards, for every pack which (hall be made fit for sale or use in Great Britain 2s 6d.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002193/18050502/015/0003
Saint James's Chronicle - Thursday 02 May 1805

_ OLD BAILEY—Monday, April 29.  
*John Blacklin* was indicted for feloniously vending playing cards, having a forged Ace of Spades. It appears that he sold the cards in packs of 51 each; and in another pack he delivered as many forged Aces of Spades. The duty on a pack of cards is 2s. 6d. but the prisoner sold his cards at 14s. per dozen packs. It was argued, that the cards thus disposed of could not be deemed complete packs; but this objection was over-ruled, and the prisoner was found guilty, but was recommended to mercy.

Tuesday, April 30.  
*Maydewall* and *Knype* were indicted for uttering forged stamps on the Ace of Spades, knowing them to be so. The fact of uttering was completely proved ; but the prisoners in their defence declared their ignorance of the forgery, which the Jury gave credit to by a verdict of acquittal.

eg Ace of Spades , playing cards, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Harding_(forger) , 
https://www.oldbaileyonline.org/browse.jsp?id=t18050918-62-person589&div=t18050918-62#highlight
RICHARD HARDING.
Deception: forgery.
18th September 1805
Reference Number	t18050918-62
Verdict	Guilty
Sentence	Death

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001254/18051108/008/0003
Public Ledger and Daily Advertiser - Friday 08 November 1805
RECORDER'S REPORT. the Recorder made Report to his Majesty of the following convicts under sentence of death in Newgate, viz,—... Richard Harding, for counterfeiting and resembling the impression of a mark used on playing cards, and for vending and selling, cards with such false impressions.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000052/18050926/003/0002
Derby Mercury - Thursday 26 September 1805
Old Bailey. Saturday, Richard Harding, card-maker, for forging the Ace of Spades; ... w[as] capitally convicted.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000174/18050923/016/0004
Morning Post - Monday 23 September 1805
OLD BAILEY. — Saturday, Sept. 21. *Richard Harding* was indicted on two counts ; the first charging him with forging, fabricating, and publishing, as true, a stamp on the spade ace ; and second, with selling and uttering the same playing cards, well knowing such stamp to be forged. The case was opened at great length by the Attorney-General.

Mr. Hockley, the printer of the legal spade ace stamps, stated that he had purchased of the prisoner's apprentice, and of him-self, various packs of cards, the aces of spades in each pack being spurious. These purchases were very frequent, and took place in the month of June, 1804. It appeared that the prisoner kept two shops, one in Hereford-street, Oxofrd-street, and the other in North-row, Grosvenor-square, where he sold cards. It was also proved that the prisoner occupied, privately, premises behind the house of Mr. Skelton, Green-street, Grosvenor-square. A body of evidence was then adduced, in order to shew that the prisoner had employed a stone seal engraver, of the name of Leadbeater, to execute aces of spades for him. Having prevailed on Leadbeater to learn the art of engraving on copper, the expence of which he was to pay. Mr. Woodthorpe, a respectable engraver, in Fetter-lane, was applied to, and he took Leadbeater under his tuition. The prisoner frequently called on him, and one day he shewed him an old plate of the spade ace, wnich he wished to be touched up. Leadbeater was unable to do the job, winch was delivered to Bunning, an apprentice, who was to put the name of Blanchard on the plate. Bunning was imposed on, for he was told that the plate was for Mr. Shepherd, at the Stamp Office.

Rivett, Millar, and Carpmeal, searched the premises occupied by the prisoner, at the back of Skelton's house, where they found a quantity of counterfeit stamp aces, and a quantity of plates tor fabricating stamps, which were concealed under ground. In the counterfeit aces, in the word *Dieu*, in the motto, in the letter R. was substituted for the letter F.

Mr. Justice Heath addressed the Jury, and observed there could be no doubt in the case. The Jury found the prisoner guilty— *Death*.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000230/18050930/005/0002
Hampshire Chronicle - Monday 30 September 1805
Old Bailey, Sept. 21.
Richard Harding was capitally indicted for forging and counterfeiting certain stamps, or Stamp-office marks, the ace of spades, on playing cards, and vending and uttering the same, knowing them to be forged and counterfeited, contrary to the statute of the 44th of the King.

This was trial of considerable interest, carried on at the prosecution of the Commissioners of Stamp Duties. The prisoner was card-maker, in a most eminent and respectable line of trade, and carried on his business at two different houses, licensed for the purpose, viz. Hereford-Street, Oxford-road, and Green-street, Grosvenor-square. The suspicions against the prisoner were excited in the Commissioners by the very small number of stamps he took out in proportion to the extensive line of business he carried on; consequence of which they employed persons to purchase different quantities of cards at his house, from the examination of which the forgeries were detected.

The prosecution was opened by Mr. Dampier, and the case stated by the Attorney-General; Mr. Garrow and Mr. Knapp were also for the prosecution, and Mr. Alley and Mr. Gurney for the prisoner.

The evidence adduced was nearly of the same nature with that brought forward against the persons who were some Sessions ago convicted of a similar offence. It was proved that the prisoner had the plates in his possession for stamping the card, and that he had been seen working upon them.

The prisoner adduced evidence to disprove any one of the charges, but a number of most respectable tradesmen from his own neighbourhood, who knew him for a series of years, gave him most excellent character.

The Jury, after a short consultation, found a verdict of *Guilty*——DEATH.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000388/18051119/004/0002
Chester Courant - Tuesday 19 November 1805
EXECUTION. John Harding, for forging the stamp upon the Ace of Spades.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001254/18050923/009/0003
Public Ledger and Daily Advertiser - Monday 23 September 1805

OLD BAILEY. Saturday 18 were tried at the Old Bailey, five whom were capitally convicted, viz. R. Harding, for counterfeiting the Ace of Spades, with intent to defraud the revenue. Our Readers must recollect that several persons hare already been tried for Vending playing cards, with forged duty aces, knoWing them to be fraudulent and fabriaceted, and that one Blacklin is now under sentence of death for the same. It appeared in the course of the evidence in this case, that the prisoner, who was some time back a card-maker near Oxford-street, had procured several men to engrave the plates, and to embark in the unlawful practice, by the most deceitful representations, and through their means he had carried on a traffic to a degree exceeding all calculation. He procured and worked off the duty aces, which he sold to other dealers at a rate comparatively nothing with the Government duty, and yet he must have amassed great sums of money.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000361/18050506/005/0002
Salisbury and Winchester Journal - Monday 06 May 1805
Old Bailey. [Yesterday]... ]J. Harding, a dashing swindler, who has sometimes called himself Lord Hawke, was tried on a capital indictment for stealing gold watch from shop Bond-street; but appearing that the shopkeeper's apprentice had entrusted him with the watch, which he said he wished to shew to his brother, his depositing a fictitious bill for double the value, the capital part of the charge was done away, and was found guilty of simple felony.—J. Maydwell and J. Knype were tried for selling cards with a forged stamp of the ace of spades, in connection with Blacklin, capitally convicted on Monday: they declared their defence, that they thought the cards had been of French manufacture, and that they were engaged in a smuggling transaction only : the Jury gave them credit for this assertion, and they were accordingly acquitted.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0001286/18050922/027/0007?browse=true
Bell's Weekly Messenger - Sunday 22 September 1805
On Friday 18 prisoners were tried, one of whom was capitally convicted. ...
Yesterday Richard Harding was capitally indicted for forging, fabricating, uttering, and publishing as true, a stamp the spade ace, with intent to defraud the revenue.

The Attokney General opened the case on the part of the prosecution, in a very long speech, in which he stated to the Jury the outline of the prisoner’s transactions. The first witness called was Mr. Hockley, the printer of the legal spade ace at the Stamp-Office. He had very frequently made purchases of packs of cards of the prisoner, as had also his apprentice, and the stamps on the aces of spades were all forges. These purchases, which were very numerous, took place in the month of June 1804. It appeared by the evidence adduced on the part of the prosecution, that the prisoner kept two shops, where these packs of cards were sold, the one in Hereford-street, Oxford-street, and the other in North-row, near Grosvenor-square. The prisoner’s apprentice deposed, that he saw his master making cards on one occasion, and observed him to paste labels on them, which he gave a gloss to by putting some liquid on them. Witness also proved that the prisoner occupied premises behind the 

house of Mr. Skelton, Green-street, Grosvenor square. A body of evidence was adduced to prove that the prisoner had employed a seal engraver of the name of Leadbeater to execute aces of spades for him. Leadbeater dined with the prisoner two years since, when he asked him if he could engrave on copper. On being answered the negative, the prisoner requested he would find some trusty artist in that branch. Leadbeater recommended a youth of the name of White, who, the prisoner was informed, could be depended on. Four duty aces were given to Leadbeater for White to imitate as closely possible, and if he was asked any questions, was to say they were for a foreigner at Hamburg. White, however, was timid, and all negociations With him was abandoned. In six or seven months after, the prisoner pressed on Leadbeater to learn the art of engraving copper, adding, that he would be at the expence of a master. Mr. Woodthorpe, a respectable engraver in Fetter-lane, waa applied to, and the witness was placed under his tuition. The prisoner's visits to Leadbeater was very frequent, and one day he showed him an old plate of the spade ace, which he wished to be touched up. Witness was unable to do the job, and an apprentice of the name of Bunning was employed, under the impression that the plate was for Mr. Shepherd of the Stamp Office. It was also proved, in evidence, that the prisoner had large dealings with Mr. Skelton for spirits, &c. for which he gave *waste paper*; that is, packs of cards, which Mr. S. sold st a profit. Rivctt, Miliar, and Carpmeal, searched the premises occupied by the prisoner, at tbe back of Mr. Skelton's house. They found a quantity of forged stamps of the spade ace, and also a quantity of forged plates for frabricating the stamps, which were concealed under ground. In the counterfeit aces, in the word"Dieu*", in the motto the letter R. was substituted for the letter E. Mr, Justice Heath addressed the Jury, and observed, there could doubt in the case. The Jury found the prisoner *Guilty*, *Death*. The prisoner is a genteel man, 35 years of age, and he was dressed in black, and full powdered!

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002593/18050924/007/0002
General Evening Post - Tuesday 24 September 1805

Old Bailey, Saturday, Sept. 21

Richard Harding was capitally indicted for forging and counterfeiting certain stamps, or Stamp Office marks, of the Ace of Spades, on playing cards, and vending and uttering the same knowng them to be forged and counterfeited, contrary to the statute of the 44th of the King.

This was a trial of cosiderable interest, carried on at the prosecution of the Commissioners of Stamp Duties. The prisoner was a cardmaker, in a most eminent and respectable line of trade, and carried on his busienss at two different houses, licensed for the purpose, viz. in Hereford-street, Oxford-road, and in Green0street, Grosvenor-square. The suspicions against the prisoner were excited in the Commissioners by the very small number of stamps he took out, in proportion to the extensive line of business he carried on; in consequence of which they employed persons to purchase different quantities of cards at his hiouse, from the examination of which the forgeries were detected.

The prosecution was opened by Mr, Dampier, and the case stated by the Attorney General; Mr. Garrow and Mr. Knapp qwere also for the prosecution; and Mr. Alley and Mr. Gurney for the prisoner.

John Hockey, an officer in the Stamp Office, whose peculiar business is to print the Ace of Spades for the card-dury department, deposed that he was sent, on the 14th of May last, by order of the Commissioners of Stamps, to purchase some cards of the prisoner, at his house, in Hereford-street. The prisoner was not at home, but he purchased six packs of a lad, hois servant, named Lepine. On the 16th, he went again, and bought six packs of the prisoner himself, and paid him 21s; he went again on the 24th, and puchased twleve packs, paying 41s.; he went again, on a subsequent day, and order five dozen to be sent to his house, No. 74, Edgeware-road, which were accordingly set, with a receipt for the purchase money; witness was not at home when they were brought. The several parcels were produced, and the witness identified them as purchased and marked by him at the time. Said, he had been thirteen years in his present department at the tamp Office, was well acquainted with the marks there were always impressed on the Ace of Spades; and said, he immediately knew those Aces on the cards he purchased at the prisoner's to be forged, as one in particular had an error in the first word of the motto of the Royal Arms, being spelled *Dier* instead of *Dieu*.

Stephen Lepine deposed, that he was apprenticed with the prisoner 2 years, ending the 8th instant. He has seen the prisoner engaged in making cards and pasting wrappers, and when the cards were made up, witness has frequently seen the prisoner take something out of a bottle, and put it on the stamp of the wrapper, for the purpose, as he thought, of giving it a gloss. He has seen copper plates in the possession of the prisoner, and he remembers having delivered cards, in his master's shop, to Mr. Hockey. He knew nothing more of the plates than having seen then in his possession. He knew a person named Leadbeater, whom he has seen with the prisoner, and who used to bring him plates for cards and bills of parcels. The prisoner carried on his business only in North-row, and Hereford-street, and no where else as the witness knew.

A witness, named Leadbeater, deposed, that he lodges at No. 65, Well-stree, Oxford-road, and is a stone seal engraver. has known the prisoner three years; remembers having dined with the prisoner at his house on a Sunday about two years since; after dinner the prisoner called him aside in another room, shut the door, and asked him if he could engrave on copper; witness said no, but he knew a young man who did, named White. The prisoner paused some time, and then asked if he could be depended upon? Witness answered *he* would endeavour to get done for him anything he wanted. Prisoner said he would call on him in a few days, which he did at the witness's lodgings, in Greek-street, and brought with hime four copies of the *Duty Ace of Spades*, with the name of the seller cut off, and told him to take them to White and get them copied as close as he could, and if White should ask any questions, to say they were for a foreginer at Hamburgh. Witness carried them to White, and asked him if he would copy them; White said he would call and let him know next day: when he did see him, and White said, for God's sake Leadbeater take care what you are about; adding, that he could engrave them, but he must give them into the hands of a Magistrate.— Witness then said, it was a cardmaker of his acquaintance that gave them to him, and afterwards went and told the prisoner what passed, and that White said it was a forgery. The prisoner answered it was no such thing, and desired witness to call on White again and tell him to do them, and any money he might ask he should have : but White said he would have nothing to do with them, but thought the witness knew who they were for. Saw White no more; nothing farther passed for six or seven months ; witness afterwards lodged at 42, Great Titchfield-street, whither the prisoner came to him and asked him if he thought he could do the cards himself; witness said NO, but that he thought he might soon learn with instructions; prisoner desired him to look out for and agree with some proper person to instruct him, and he would pay the expence ; and witness accordingly applied to Mr. Woodthorpe, an engraver in Fetter-lane, who agreed, for twenty guineas to instruct him. The prisoner frequently asked him, while under Mr. Woodthorpe's instruction, how he came on ; and at one time asked him if he could not copy the Ace of Spades, as he was much distressed since the poor old *Baronet*, who used to do them for him the last sixteen years was dead. He afterwards brought the witness copper plate with 24 Aces of Spades and asked him if he could *touch it up* (a term used by the engravers for repairing a plate). Witness said he would try, and on the Sunday following went to dine with the prisoner, who after dinner brought him into a room with the plate, and locked the dour. Witness tried to touch it up, but could not. The prisoner came to him in a quarter of an hour. Witness remembers the numbers this plate were 1, 2, 6, 7. Prisoner came again to his lodgings, and asked him if he could engrave on brass, which he answered in the negative ; he brought a plate with him under his coat, with twenty Aces of Spades upon it, and told the witness to copy 14, 15, 19, 20,  which witness said he would, and employed a young man named Bunning, an apprentice to Mr Woodthorpe, to do it ; gave the plate afterwards to the prisoner, who said it was very neatly done, and came shortly afterwards to have another done, but instead of the name of Harding, to put in that of Blanchard, and gaVe him an Exportation Ace to copy from; this done he came again, and ordered two more with the name Harding, and the duty on, observing, that if he worked too much on one plate, he should be found out. Witness remembers at the time when Harding and Lee were taken taken. The officers had been to his house, and the prisoner gave him instructions, if he was asked any questions, to say he knew nothing about the business. Witness was apprehended in June, and at that time there were two of the prisoner's plates in his house, which the prisoner had brought to have some more printed.

*Cross-examoned by Mr. Gurney.* Witnes said, he had told Bunning, who engraved those plates, that they were for Mr. Shepherd, Engraver to the Stamp Office: that he himself was taken up three times after his first examination, that he was a little afraid for his neck; acknowledged that the first and second accounts he gave to the Magistrates of the transaction were very different, and neither true, but said that he would abide by the last account he had given, as that was the truth. The others he acknowledged to be false, though all taken before the same Magistrate.

Christopher Bunning supported the testimony of the last witness, so far as concerned him.

Mr. Skelton a grocer, in Green-street, Grosvenour-square, deposed, that the prisoner was originally his shopman; about two years since he took from him a warehouse in his back-yard, of which the prisoner generally kept the key, but sometimes lieft it at his house. He had a copper-plate press in this room, and occupied it in printing Aces of Spades, at which the witness never saw him particularly employed but once, so as to see what he was printing. The prisoner himself frequently came there, sometimes twice a day, and often not for days together : he had frequently seen him at work there, with an apron before him, and flannel jacket on. He dealt with the witness for spirits and groceries, and used to give him other commodities in exchange, called *waste paper*; the commodity so called was playing cards, in perfect packs, made up in white paper, not sealed, charged to the witness 17s. 6d. per dozen packs, and sold again by him at a profit. He sometimes had four, five, or six dozen at a time. This traffic continued for some time before the prisoner had taken the witness's back-premises. It was not the witness who kept the account current, but his wife, who died some time since—(here the witness burst into tears. His late wife was the unfortunate person who some weeks since put an end to her existence at a village some distance from town, under the tortures of mind she experienced on the subject of this business). His house was searched at the time the prisoner was taken, and an acconnt current between them in the handwriting of the prisoner, found there, which the prisoner the day before had brought and given him, and desired him to take care of it, but did not then explain his reasons. The officers searched also the back-house, and found the flannel jacket and other articles, all the prisoner's property. The prisoner also brought him a large roll of papers in blue wrapper, and desired him to put it safe out of the way, and the witness took it to the lodging of his daughter, and placed it in her custody; she did not know what it contained. The officers came there a second time and found some copper plates, by digging in garden, near the privy ; they were placed there, as he supposes, by the prisoner, as he had told them they were. He acknowledged the officers dug for them his direction.

Edward Stone, a servant of the prisoner, said it was part of his business to cut aces of spades to perfect packs, once a month : they were twenty on a sheet ; he never saw any there with less. He fewer within the last six months befere the prisoner was apprehended than in the six months preceding.

John Rivett, a Bow Street Officer, deposed, that he went with Carpmeal and Miller, on the 25th June, to Hereford-street, and apprehended the prisoner, his apprentice, and another servant of his. Nothing particular was found there; went to Leadbeater's, and there found two copperplates of the ace of spades, and some paper, on the top of a rolling press. Went also to Skelton's, and there found, in the room behind the yard, an iron fly press, two rowllers of a rolling-press, a flannel jacket, a. red-ink ball, and a marble slab; on searching the dust hole below, they found the remainder of the rolling-press, and the plates hid under ground in the garden ; in the back room there were three gross of packs of cads made up, but without the aces of spades. On the 9th of July they went again to Leadbeater's, and found the plates, with aces of spades in the privy. In the house of Mr. Shingler they found, in a box with foul linen, a roll of papers containing impressions of the ace of spades.

An Officer of the Stamp Office proved that this parcel contained 3000 impressions of the ace of spades.

The Distributor of Stamps proved that the ace of spaces he delivers out to the card-makers are always twenty on a sheet ; and consequently no aces not so printed have been printed at the Stamp Office.

Here closed the evidence for the prosecution ; the prisoner adduced no evidence to disprove any one of the charges, but a number of most respectable tradesmen from his own neighbourhood, who knew him for a series of years gave him a most excellent character.

The Jury, after a short consultation, found a verdict *Guilty*, *Death*. —Aged 35.


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000230/18061222/001/0001
Hampshire Chronicle - Monday 22 December 1806

On Wednesday last a most melancholy circumstance occurred on Southsea Common. Mr. W. A. Limerick, in company with Mr. J. Hyde, Mr. W. Hamilton, and Mr. W. Wilkinson, having agreed to shoot at a mark for a wager, assembled near the bathing machines for the purpose of deciding the bet; when, having fixed the ace of spades to a post, they withdrew to a distance of twelve yards. Limerick, by the consent of the party, was to have the first fire; he accordingly pulled the trigger of his pistol, which hung fire, when he removed, and another of the party came up to fire. Limerick had moved but a very short distance, when he received a ball in his right side, which passed through his body, grasing both his arras. The ball came from the pistol of Mr. Hamilton, which accidentally went off as he was about to fire at the card.— Mr. Limerick immediately dropped his pistol, and, after running about 50 yards, fell down. He was taken to the bathing-house, and from thence to the Crown Inn, where he expired early the next morning. The most perfect friendship existed amongst them; and the unfortunate deceased made oath before his death that it was accidental. A coroner's inquest was held on the body, and a verdict of *accidental death* returned. Mr. Limerick had recently got his appointment as a writer in the East India Company's service, and was waiting to take his passage in the General Stuart East Indiaman,  to India, where his father is, and from whom he has been absent years. He was buried on Saturday morning in the Garrison Chapel. The other gentlemen belonged to the General Stuart.

