



Oliver mentioned in https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001476/18171020/010/0004
London Courier and Evening Gazette - Monday 20 October 1817
THE TRIALS FOR TREASON

TO DO 

On Saturday, the *Morning Chronicle* asserted that our from Derby were designed, not merely •* uJ «« the case of th« prisoners, but to inflame the public mind against them.** This is charge which may made against the publication of any account of the crimes with which they are accused. At this rate.no* thing should ever appear respecting any accused person, until trial is coocl-sded. Yet all the papersarc daily filled with Police Reports io the face of this rule. Why publish examinations before Magistrates; why publish bills of indictment before trial ? It is particularly complained, that on Thursday, our Derby Letter began thus, tb* town all buttle and confusion, arising from the commencement of the Quarter Sessions, and the arrival of the period appointed for the trial of tiiose unfortunate men, who by a series of the most wanton and outrageous acta, on the June last, threw this and the adjoining county into a state the utmost terror and alarm.” It is also complained, that we said places of religious worship had been chosen for the assemblage of the seditions, though that fact was affirmed io the sermon preached before the Judges previous the Court's opening. And What crime is there in saying, the men going on trial are those who committed the excesses on the 9di of June ? not the bill of indictment say they same? Have not all the Newspaper details, reports and rumours said the same ? Has not the same been said hundred times over by every Newspaper in England ? The very fact of sending the men trial authorises the assertion. Is there nan in England who, on such a fact, or on such an assertion, would doom the men to death ? No, certainly. That can only be done by a Jury, after a minute and impartial investigation of the evidence on both sides.— The Magistracy decide, in the first instance, such charges »o be sufficient send such men to trial. After this, how can newspapers speak of them but as the so accused ? While we are censured for speaking these men in similar terms to those which all other newspapers have used respecting them, let see how the complaining Warning Chronicle has been basely endeavouring to defeat the justice of its country, assertions'of their innocence, by insinuations that tltey were instigated by Oliver, &c. in publications timed to have an effect at the moment trial. F row Jl/urnlnj Chronicle Tutting, Odoh-nr the Ath—Extract en n f a Lelcr the moil conspicuous jmrl of the Paper, s : gnpd Etlcmlliam

... [FITZWILLIAM LETTER]]


---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001476/18171021/003/0002

London Courier and Evening Gazette - Tuesday 21 October 1817

[TH Courier response ]

TO DO

William Turner, accused of High Treason, and one of the persons included the indictment of fptty eight for rebellion in Derbyshire, was yesterday put oppn his trial at Derby, before another Jury, and the trial was expected be concluded tips day. Previously to the commencement the trial, Mr. Denman, Counsel for the Prisoners, instructed by the agents of traitors, no doubt, complained the Court that the Courier had violated its prohibition, by publishing garbled accounts of the proceedings. Mr. Denman followed his instructions, which informed him, partially and falsely, if the report in the Times of this day, which think it more fair to quote than our own, be Correct, says the other Papers copied the garbled account of the Attorney General's speech expressly from the Courier of last evening, the Morning Chronicle adding what the Courier omitted." The Courier expressly said, that the statement it gave of the Insurrection, was not account of the Attorney-General's speech, garbled or ungarbled, but a statement to inform the public generally the nature the offence under trial. Mr. Denman could not have rend the Courier, or he would not have made such misrepresentation; must have spoken merely from the instructions of the agents of traitors. This statement which wc gave, the Morning Chronicle next day chose, for i's own purposes, to consider as a garbled account the Attorney-General's speech, and under that pretence published a report of that speech. Circumstances, however, shew how well it knew it was acting under pretences and falsehood, how fearful it was of its own conscious guilt and the punishment of the Court. It raised clamour against wliat it called the demi-official Journal of Government, a description of which are proud, whether just or not; as violating the injunctions of the Court, and while it blamed, it followed what it censured as our evil course. That was not enough. It did not feel easy in acting on a pretence evidently so shallow. It must have further protection. Therefore, it prevailed on another Morning Paper, which generally supports the Government, to commit the same offence it did, under precisely the same word of apology. They published the same verbatim, these two Papers which scold each other on politics nearly as much as any other two do. Now,” said the Chronicle, I can not only set pretended precedent from the Courier, but I share my guilt with another Government Journal ; lam shielded on both sides.” This was not all. were also accused of giving garbled accounts of the evidence, though we merely published list of witnesses they were examined, carefully omitting any application to the prisoners of any thing they said, and in fact giving nothing of wh.lt they did say. If, then, published a garbled account of the Attorney General's speech, and a garbled account of the evidence; why did not the Chronicle publish a correct account of the evidence, to correct our garbled report the one case as well as the other? It was by far the necessary duty of the two. But. they dared not go quite so far. That would have been to have violated the injunctions of the Court, not only in letter and in form, bUt in spirit, in the most essential point. In fact, it was the report of the Attorney General's speech in the Chronicle, that was yesterday the real ground of complaint, though the agents of traitors' contrived to make it appear as the report of the Courier, else how could the Attorney-General, in alluding to the report complained of, say ; There is here a professed account of what was stated by me.”—No such professed” account appeared in the Courier. It was the Chronicle that the professed” account appeared. Had the Counsel and the Judges read the Chronicle and the Courier during the three last days of last week, they would have understood the subject precisely as we state it. But the complaint was made at the instance of the agents of traitors, the opposite side was not warned or prepared to answer it, and the agents of traitors were thus enabled to make the affair go before the world just with nch sort of colouring as they chose to give it. And after ail; the publication of the Attorney-General's speech was not a mischievous infraction of the orders of the Court, though a very distinct breach of them. One of the journalists, who was the first to clamour against us ; when we answered by referring to the publication of the Bill of Indictment, replied,- that was an official document, its phraseology merely technical, all its details and assertions of guilt, all its inflammatory language passed for nothing with the public, it being notoriously a highly coloured fx-pnrtc statement. And, pray, what the speed) of the Attorney-General, or of the opening Counsel in any case, but highly charged, partial representation, which passes for nothing until it is proved to be true the evidence, and the charge from the Judge ? The Chronicle should thank us for helping it out of the scrape into which it has fallen. Indeed, this act of service the more readily perform, we know the clamour the Chronicle raiies is not in a spirit of hostility to the Courier, but with the hope of Calumniating the Government, by representing that the Courier acts wholly under the direction of Ministers. Yesterday we stated, and again affirm, that no one communication, written or verbal, has been received from any person connected with Government, on the subject of the matter that Has appeared in this Paper respecting these trials. We ourselves have gone to great expence, to procure the earliest accounts them, and we just as much reason to lament the prohibition of the Court some the other Journalists, who whine and whimper, and pout, every morning, over their fruitless speculation, of esftbltshihg expresses the road for “the and. for Lord Slj>- mouxh.” Every one and every thing hostile to the Government is espoused the Chronicle as a matter of comse. Black spirit and white, blue spirits and grey; mingle, mingle, mingle; all you that mingle may To the Oppowtioa ia would bars traitor eicape, tl»4i grounds may fot Hie suspension of rtie Habeas Corpus ( to the low detestable faction assassins who call themselves reformers, please those divers other traitors unknown, , would have traitors escape that rebellion may prpsper; and hence, in no spirit of ill will to the Courier, but purely to calumniate Government and encourage treason, it attacks Ministers as the Editors and Conductors of this Paper. The charge very agreeable to sis, very flattering. Not so, we fear, the Ministers, who, if the Chronicle speaks truly every day, of the horrible embarrassment into whicb they have involved all our public affairs, have quite enough to with the business of their otyp Offices, without writing paragraphs for the Courier. The above observations have been written upon the report in the Times this morning of the proceedings yesterday at Derby, previously to the perusal of the account in the Courier this day, wished to avoid being influenced by the representations of our own reporter. A perusal of our own report, since writing the abovp, however, strongly confirms us in the review we taken. Had we previously known of the proceedings in Court yesterday, would not this day have copied from the an account of the Attorney General's opening speech on Brandreth's trial; but that part of our Paper was printed before our Express from Derby arrived.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001476/18171022/003/0002
London Courier and Evening Gazette - Wednesday 22 October 1817
p2

It will seen by the account of the proceedings at Derby, that another of the individuals (*Wm. Turner*) charged with High Treason, has been found Guilty.— To excite pity for a convicted traitor, some of the journals still insinuate that the Jury were influenced by accounts in this Paper of the proceedings on the trial, as if they, who had witnessed the whole, whom every passing was addressed, should not know more than what are called "garbled extracts" could inform them ! The trial began on Thursday ; nothing respecting the proceedings on it could appear in this Paper till Friday, and on Saturday, three or four hours before the Friday's Papers could arrive, the Jury had given their verdict. The London mail reaches Derby at two o'clock, and the Jury had pronounced their decision before twelve.

The *Morning Chronicle* boasts of having ever supported the cause of humanity. Humanity ! Is it humanity to advocate the cause assassins and traitors, endeavouring spread fire and desolation over the land? Two days before *Brandreth*'s' trial, it argued his case over in a letter, signed and pronounced him innocent: it contended he was a dupe of Oliver's artifices, he, this *Brandreth*, who appears to be one the most atrocious ruffians of the assassinating gang of Reformers. This was the *Chronicle*'s "humanity." It would have let loose upon us a sanguinary ruffian, a murderer. To-day it says— "Justice requires that Jurors should not be prejudiced who are to sit on the trial of their fellow-creatures;" and it obeys its own maxim by shewing to the Jury going try a man, that the man is innocent!—that he was only the dupe of OLIVER, though Oliver's name was never mentioned on the trial." All this canting and clamour, and misrepresentation, is designed, no doubt, to answer the same purpose as Fitzwilliam's Letter, to prejudge the innocence of the men yet to tried.

