https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18170614/005/0002
Leeds Mercury - Saturday 14 June 1817

TRIALS FOR TREASON.

FIRST DAY.— MONDAY, JUNE 9.

This day was fixed for the Trials of the State Prisoners confined in the Tower.

Last night the Guards were doubled at the Tower, and this morning orders were issued to prevent all strangers from entering the interior of the place. In consequence of this, the Yeomen of the Guard who were posted at the gate of the entrance leading to the bloody Tower, prevented all strangers from going that way.

At about 20 minutes after eight o'clock, Watson, Hooper, Preston, and Thistlewood, were brought from the Tower to Westminster Hall, in four glass coaches. In each coach were four Yeomen of the Guard, and one prisoner ; and the whole procession was escorted by two trpops of Life Guards. They passed over London Bridge. When they arrived in Palace-yard, the prisoners got out of their respective coaches, in the order in which we have mentioned their names, and were conducted, each between two Yeomen of the Guard, through a lane of Constables, to the wicket at the great entrantce into the Hall.

On the gates of the Hall being opened, at a quarter after eight, it was discovered that a large and strong railing had been thrown across the hall from the Treasury steps, to prevent the pressure of the crowd and the interruption of the Law Officets in their passage to the Court.

At half-past eight o'clock, there was a tremendous crush at the doors of the Court, which was immediately followed by a grand entry of Barristers, who took their seats at the back part, reserving two clear benches for the Counsel on the part of the Crown and the prisoners.

At 20 minutes to nine o'clock, Mr. Watson was ushered into Court by a party of Yeomen of the Guard. He was dressed in a suit of black, and carried under his right arm a book; he bowed respectfully to the Court, and took his seat immediately behind the bar.

The Captain of the Yeomen or Gentleman Jailor, and the Lieutenant of the Tower, took their seats to the left of Watson. Preston was next ushered into Court, attended by another party of Yeomen of the Guard, he was also dressed in black; he appeared cheerful, and cordially shook hands with Watson: a party of Yeomen also escorted him. Hooper next made his appearance, and was dressed in black; he also shook hands with Watson and the rest. Thistlewood came in last; he looked ill: was dressed in a sailor's jacket and trowsers, and wore a black handkerchief. He manifested great anxiety to speak to Watson, and on his approach to him shook him heartily by the hand.—Sixteen Yeomen of the Guard sat by the side and behind the prisoners.

Before the proceedings commenced, the prisoners frequently conversed together. The Attorney-General elected to try the prisoners separately, and to take the case of Watson first.

A great number of Jurors were challenged both by the Counsel for the Crown, and also by the Counsel forthe prisoner.

The following Gentlemen were then sworn of the Jury.

Thomas Allmack, Conduit street, bookseller.  
Robert Nocton, Temple-bar, button-maker.  
John Tomlinson, Covent.Garden, woollen-draper.  
P. Richardson. Charing-Cross, Lottery-office Keeper  
John Briant, Wapping-street, Anchor-smith.  
Samuel Kell. Red-Lion street, Holborn, carpenter.  
Richard Ramsden, Holborn, Capilaire-maker.  
William Phillips, Holborn, iron-monger.  
T. W. Barker, Hatton-garden, silversmith.  
Richard Perkins, Holborn, shoe-maker.  
William Hatblock, Shoreditch, currier.  
Samuel Knight, Norton-Falgate, druggist.

Proclamation was made in the usual way, as soon as the Jury was sworn, and then Mr. Barlow, the Officer of the Court, proceeded to read the Indictment Bill. After the-first count thereof was read,

Lord Ellenborough interposed and observed, that as all the other counts had annexed to them the same series of Overt Acts, he suppesed that it would not be required by either party to have the whole of these repeatedly read over.

Mr. Wetherell, on the part of the prisoners, said, it could not be the wish of the Gentleman (Mr. Serjeant Copley) to cause the least unnecessary trouble or delay, but on the contrary their wish was to prevent both. The officer of the Court then by the consent of all sides, only recited the general counts, four in number, of the indictment, without repeating the overt acts.

Mr. Shepherd, the junior Counsel for the prosecution, then opened the pleadings ; but signified, that after the time that was occupied in reading over the particulars of the charge, he would refrain from repeating it.

The Attorney-General then rose, and in a very long speech set forth the charges against the prisoners.- After he had concluded his speech on Monday, and evidence had been gone into, the Court ordered no part of the proceedings to be published during the trial.

SECOND DAY.

The prisoners were brought into Court with the same ceremony and solemnity as yesterday, and the Judges took their seats on the Bench precisely at nine o'clock. The first witness called, was

*Charles Shearman, Jun.* who was examined by the Solicitor-General. He deposed to the events in Spa-Fields, to the flag placed in the waggon, and to the speeches from that vehicle. On his cross-examination, he said, that he was twelve yards from the waggon, and heard no other part of the speech of a young man, but his invitation to jump down. To a question from the Court, he said, that only one person spoke while he was in the field, and he could not tell whether more than dne individual jumped down, general as might be the invitation.

*Mr. Johne Stafford*, chief clerk at Bow-street, said, that on the 2d of December there was a great concourse of people at Spa-Fields; Mr. Hunt and others addressed the populace. He saw a flag displayed of three colours; green, white, and red. Inscribed upon it was, Nature, Justice, Truth, and some other words. A great many Police Officers were in attendance.

Lord Ellenborough observed, that it might be as well here to produce the flag itself, and the flag was accordingly exhibited by Mr. Hobler, Clerk of the Mayor's Court.

The witness resumed, after some further trifling particulars, that he saw all the people in the waggon in the act of jumping down. He endeavoured to break the pole to which one of the flags was attached, but was unable to do so ; yet, he got the flag under his feet, when Limerick, the officer, asaisted him. On his cross-examination, he deposed that all the assistants of the police officers were in attendance. He saw no soldiers in the field, nor did he know that any soldiers were in the vicinity.

*Limerick* was next examined to nearly the same particulars.

*Mr. Platt* proved the discharging a pistol at him in Mr. Beckwith's shop, under the circumstances already before the public, and during his examination it was attempted to be shown that the pistol went off while the witness was wrestling with the person by whom was supposed to be discharged.

*Sir J. Shaw* spoke to the seizure of the colours, &c. at the Royal Exchange. He thought it a very contemptible riot, which might easily have been suppressed.

*Mr. Hall*, the High Sheriff of the county of Middlesex, detailed what had occurred in the Minories. He only saw about 19 men with arms, and they were rather wantonly than viciously using them. He thought that about 20 soldiers might have put an end to the whole disturbance. He applied to the Tower for assistance, but in vain.

Several other witneesses spoke to the same effect. Some important papers taken upon the person of Watson, were rejected from the want of proper identification.

THIRD DAY.

This morning, the State prisoners arrived at Westminster at about a quarter past eight, and having been brought into Court, Watson was placed as usual in the front, and the others immediately behind him; they shook hands together, and appeared to be provided with refreshments, and were in high spirits; they were attended by sixteen Yeomen of the Guard. At half past eight, Mr. Justice Bailey took his seat on the Bench, for the purpose of disposing of several common motions, and at nine o'clock the Chief Justice and the other Judges entered the Court. At the same time the Attorney-General, Mr. Topping, Mr. Gurney, Mr. Richardson, and Mr. Shepherd, for the prosecution, came in; and when Mr. Wetherell, and Mr. Serjeant Copley, had taken their seats, the trial proceeded.

*Charles Mills*, of Terne's-court, Somers-Town, a patrole of Bow-street, was examined by the Solicitor General.

*John Castle* was afterwards examined, and his examination occupied the whole of the day.

At seven o'clock Lord Ellenborough asked the Counsel for the prisoners, whether they meant to proceed in the cross-examination, as the examination in chief was finished.

Mr. Wetherell said he was impressed with the necessity of asking the witness a few questions, at the same time that he felt the fatigue under which the Court and Jury must suffer, if he proceeded at length into the cross-examination of the witness. After so long examination as had already taken place, it could not be supposed that his examination of Castle could be short, he would proceed to the usual hour at which the Court adjourned, and resume in the morning.

The Attorney General objected to any suspension of the cross-examination. It was open to the Counsel for the prisoner either to proceed now or to-morrow.

Lord Ellenborough said, that the Court were prepared to hear him go on ; but at the same time they were ready to accommodate the Cousel for the prisoner.

Mr. Wetherell submitted to the Court, that in a case so infinitely important they would direct that the witness Castle, who appeared, on the return of the list of witnesses to be in custody, should not be permitted to have communication directly or indirectly, with any person, previous to his cross-examination.

Lord Ellenborough did not see how the Court, with regard to precedent, could make such an order; but he thought Mr. Wetherell could best rely on the assurance of the Attorney-General.

The Attorney-General said, he was sure the Court would agree with him in thinking, that Mr Wetherellhad asked no more than was right ; and after hearing their Lordships' opinion, he felt it his duty to give a positive order, that the witness, Castle, shall not on any pretence have any communication whatever on the subject of the trial, till after his cross-examination.

After this, it was settled that the cross-examination should take place at the opening of the Court to morrow, and Mr. Wetherell said, he was afraid it would occupy a considerable time.

In the afternoon, while Mr. Gurney was examining Castle, Mr. Stafford brought into Court a considerable number of pieces of paper, with the following and various other inscriptions on them, "*Britons arise! No poverty in a plentiful Country.
!*" which he stated were circulating in great numbers throughout the Hall. They were immediately handed to the Attorney-General, who rose and addressed the Court immediately: " He should at all times be extremely sorry to interrupt the proceedings of the Court, but more particulalry upon an important occasion, like the present; but seeing the Sheriff in Court, he hoped that Gentleman would excuse the liberty he took in suggesting that more than ordinary caution ought to be exerted in the Hall, to prevent the infraction of the public peace, when papers of the very dangerous tendency of those produced were in circulation.

On the swearing of the officers to keep the Jury from any communication, one of them observed, that if detained in the Court all day, and in seclusion all the evening, he feared the proceedings would be still further deferred by some of them being at length obliged to require medical assistance.

The Court felt their situation, and would endeavour to afford every convenience compatible with duty. It was better not to say more in Court. The officer attendant on the Jury was ordered to attend their Lordships in their Chamber.

The Sheriff now quitted the Court, and the proceedings of the day finished without any interruption.

The Tower yesterday received an additional reinforcenen of 200 men from the brigade of guards. The whole are placed under the command of Lieut. Col. Cochrane,of the 3d guards.

The prisoners, on their return from the Court, the moment they entered the Hall, were received with loaud huzzas fromn the surrounding multitude, which were repeated in Palace-yard, and continued to Westminster-bridge.

FOURTH DAY.

After Mr. Justice Holroyd had disposed of a great many common motions, the other Judges took their seats on the Bench, and at half-past nine Mr. Wetherell commenced his cross-examination of Cassels who was brought up in custody. His first interrogatories to this witness were to ascertain whether he had had any communication with any person, or person's, directly or indirectly, by writing, printing, or otherwise, upon the subject of his testimony yesterday: all of which intterrogatories he answered in the negative.

The orders for the exclusion of strangers at the Tower during the time that the State Prisoners are there, continue to be enforced, and no person who is not well known is permitted to enter the interior of the garrison.

Several Members of Parliament, Sir Robert Wilson, Mr. Bruce, Mr. Hunt, &c. were in Court.

Every thing remained in perfect quietness in and about the Hall, and this day's proceedings finished at six o'clock. The prisoners were cheered on going back to the Tower.


---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000076/18170621/007/0002?browse=true

Leeds Mercury - Saturday 21 June 1817
p2-3

THE MERCURY

The result of the trials for High Treason will do more towards removing discontent, allaying irritation, and tranquillising the public mind, than all the unconstitutional and coercive measures recommended by the present advisers of the Crown, or we should rather say, that this result will materially counteract the pernicious effects which these measures have a tendency to produce. The acquittal of obscure and unprotected men, against whom all the power of the Crown was arrayed, will afford a practical proof that there still exists in our Constitution a real barrier against oppression, which cannot be passed by the most despotic ministers. A proof, the cogency of which, the most ignorant and illiterate will be able fully to appreciate. It evinces that the trial by jury, which forms an integral part in the British Constitution, has not been deteriorated by those influences, which have, so essentially impaired the representative part of the system. We also rejoice in the acquittal of the state prisoners on another ground, because this solemn verdict of the jury will deter Ministers from instituting prosecutions for high treason on light and insufficient grounds, on the credit of such witnesses as CASTLE, or on the information of such incendiaries as OLIVER. It was the acquittal of Mr. HARDy, HORNE TOOKE, and their associates, in the year 1794, which preserved at that awful period, the ark of the Constitution from perishing on the rocks of anarchy, or of being swallowed up in the abyss of despotism. It was a period full of cruel inquietude and alarm, the liberties and lives of the people seemed in imminent danger of being sacrificed at the caprice of an overbearing administration, when the firm and upright conduct of a jury, presented its impenetrable shield between the accused and the accusers; though the indictment had in effect been found by both Houses of Parliament, and though every means possessed by the Crown, had been resorted to, to insure their conviction. The decision of the jury in the case to which we refer, operated almost like a charm; its effect was instantaneous; it at once restored confidence to the people, checked the vindictive proceedings of the Ministers of the Crown, and prevented that fatal catastrophe, which at that period seemed inevitable,

IN the House of Lords on Monday, LORD LiVERPOOL, in answer to the inquiries of EARL GREY, distinctly admitted that Mr. OLIVER was an agent employed by Ministers, for the purpose of detecting conspiracies; but it is now evident, from numerous facts, that this spy, finding no materials for his occupation in any existing plots, actively engaged in the fabrication of them, and that on the most extensive scale. This diabolical plot against the lives and liberties of his Majesty's subjects has already been the subject of investigation by the Magistracy of this Riding, the proceedings and result of which is a flattering confirmation of the accuracy of the statement we presented to the public on this subject. We trust that it will also become the subject of Parliamentary inquiry: the honour and dignity of Parliament, the safety of the country, and the character of the Executive Government, are deeply implicated in probing this matter to the bottom. Ministers, if innocent of any participation in this plot, ought most zealously to aid this investigation. To oppose inquiry, will be to involve themselves in the foul suspicions; for should it appear that Ministers have, we do not say participated in the plot, (for that would be the blackest treason) but even by their negligence connived at it ;— if, on the first intimation of the misconduct of their agent, they did not instantly recall him, and if, on proof of his guilt, they persist in protecting him, it will be the duty of Parliament to address the PRINCE REGENT, to remove these ministers for ever from his councils. This, indeed, on other grounds, would be a consummation most devoutly to be wished. The Secret Committee of the House of Commons have not yet made their Report, and it is suggested in the *Times*, that an investigation into the case of OLIVER ought to precede the delivery of their report. OLIVER himself will, no doubt, be called before the Committee, who Will probably find it their duty to hand him over to that confinement in which he has been the means of involving so many innocent men.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18170621/005/0002
Leeds Mercury - Saturday 21 June 1817

WATSON'S TRAIL CONTINUED.

On Thursday, at half-past nine, the trial again re-commenced with the cross-examination of Castle, who was brought up in custody; the cross-examination continued till one o'clock, after which a number of witnesses were produced to speak to various circumstances ;  this occupied the the Court till half-past six, when the prisoners were again re-conveyed to the Tower.

On Friday, the examination of witnesses for the Crown was resumed, which continued till half-past twelve, when the Attorney-General declared he had closed his case.— Mr. Wetherell then commenced stating the prisoner's case, and did not terminate his addres, until six o'clock in the evening. The Learned Counsel's speech was full of legal argument, and displayed the strongest powers of reasoning. He contended that, if the case of the prisoner were made out, it came within the provisions of the law for tumultuary riots, and not within the statutes of treason. It was impossible, he said, to bring it within the latter, without breaking down those great boundaries which marked out the distinctive classification of criminal offence. He also took an historical review of the diffrent riots which took place for the last century, the turnults in the reign of Queen Anne and George I. Lord George Gordon's riots in 1780, and others, down to the late period of the Corn Bill and said, that, if the law of treason could have been at all applied, the Attorney-Generals of these times would lave called it into operation. At great length he combated the principle of constructive and interpretative treason. —At six o'clock the evidence for the prisoner was about to be entered into, whicn thle Court adjourned.

On Saturday, Mr. Wetherell proceeded to ca1l witnesses upon the first head of the defence, namely, the incredibility of John Castle's evidence. Mr. Hunt, the Spa-Fields orator, and Mr. Bryant, a solicitor, were examined on this head. Evidence was then tendered to shew Castle had been guilty of crimes of which he had never been convicted, but the Judges decided it could not be received.— At one o'clock Mr. Wetherell finished the evidence for the prisoner, and after their Lordships had taken some coffee, and Mr. Serjeant Copley had taken some necessary refreshment, he rose and addressed the Jury on the evidence on both sides. At the close of his speech, the prisoner declining to offer any thing to the Court himself, the Solicitor-General was occupied several hours in replying on behalf of the Crown, and the Court then adjourned till Monday.

The Court was crowded on each day during the week with persons of distinction; outside Westminster Hall there were numbers of people, who huzzaed the Prisoners, on their arrival and departure each day.— The Jury, in complhancc with a wish expressed to that effect, were allowed to communicate with their friends, and to walk out for the air attended by the Sheriff's officers, that no one might have intercourse with them.

SEVENTH DAY.

MONDAY, JUNE 16. ACQUITTAL OF WATSON.

At twenty minutes past ten o'clock Lord Ellenborough proceeded to sum up the evidence to the Jury. His Lordship commenced by reading the precise form of the indictment against the prisoner, and explaining the four parts of which it was composed. He also laid down the ]aw of treason, and explained the precise bearings of the Statute of the 25th of Edward III. and the parts of this Statute which were applicable to the present case, namely, the compassing and imagining the death of the King and levying war against his authority. He did this not in any language of his own, but, as he expressed it, in the words of Lord Hale, Mr. Justice Foster, and some of the most eminent and best legal authorities, who were known in our country. By these eminent characters it had been laid down, that tumults which had merely a private object were not within the Statute of treason; but that those of a broader complexion, the breaking down fences and enclosures, and offences of that character, were within the law. The Learned Judge agreed with the Counsel for the prisoner, 

that the main question for the Jury was, whether the offences charged upon the prisoner were of the character of irregular and unprepared violence, or of a preconcerted and systematic plan. This was the main issue. Here he would observe, upon a remark of the Counsel for the prisoner, on the subject of the Law Officers of the Crown not calling either Harrison or Keans— why, it was evident that these men, if called, may demur to any question relative to their participation in this plot, yet the Counsel for the prisoner might have called them if they pleased, to shew the innocency of these transactions ; for if they be innocent, then these witnesses would incur no responsibility, whereas, in the other vie, they must answer at their peril. The Learned Judge, with reference to the testimony of Castle, left it to the Jury to consider how far his testimony was confirmed by other evidence, and quoted the opinion of Lord Holt in favour of the admissibility of such testimony under certain circumstances.

The Learned Judge then read *seriatim* the whole of the evidence for the prosecution-becoming exhausted of towards three o'clock,

Mr. Justice Bayley continued to read the evidence to the Jury, and occasionally point out the parts in the detail in which the testimony of Castle was confirmed.

When the evidence was gone through—

Lord Ellenborough said he would only add a few observations to the Jury-great pains were taken (and praise-worthy ones for their clienit) by the Counsel for the prisoner, to nullify the testimony of Cassels.- The Crown were bound to furnish a list of witnesses to the prisoner, who was not bound to deliver the same list to the preosecutor; it might then possibly happen that if the Crown had the same opportunity of investigating the characters of those who exposed the immoral life of their witness, the same stigma might perhaps attach to those who made such a statement. It appeared, however, that the prisoner and his associates continued in intercourse with Cassels, from the 15th of November to the 2nd of December, notwithstanding his infamous toast at Hunt's, which ought to have at once compelled them to discard him for ever. But the important confirmatory parts for the Jury to consider were the taking Mr. Cosser's house, the pipe making by Bentley, and other matters of less, but not unimportant notice. The Learned Judge reverted at considetable length to the serious character of the evidence, and concluded by entreating that the Jury would give in such a verdict as wouid quiet their own consciences, protect the prisoner, and give him immunity from punishment if he deserved not to be visited by it ; while they would, at the same time, feel that they were protecting the laws of the land, and giving them, and those who administer them, effective security.

The Jury now proposed to withdraw, and an officer a (Mr. Beaumont) was sworn to take them in charge during their deliberation.

*Lord Ellenborough* then intimated to the Jury that they might have refreshment in the box before they retired; afterward, until their verdict was given in, or they could not expect to receive any.

*Mr. Justice Abbot* suggested to them to have some tea or coffee.

Some of the Jury wished for sandwiches and wine and water and in a few minutes after manifested an anxiety to retire and consider their verdict without waiting for refreshmment.

*Lord Ellenborough* told them not to be in a hurry ; the Court would very readily wait. Officers soon after escorted them out of Court to their room. Most of the barristers in the front seats, after the retirement of the Jury, stood up, as did Mr. Watson, folding his arms. Afterwards, he wrote a note to Mr. Harmer, his solicitor, then conversed with Mr. Wetherell. who was on the floor of the Court, and received Mr. Harmer's answver.

The Officer, to whose care the Jury were committed, took the following oath:—

"You shall well and truly keep this Jury without meat, drink, or fire—you shall suffer no person whatever to speak to them, nor you yourself, unless it be to ask them whether they are agreed, or not."

Before the return of the Jury, great huzzaing and clapping of hands were heard in the Hall. Muchsurprise was apparent in Court. Lord Ellenborough said the Hall ought to be cleared, and Mr. Sheriff Kirby went out, as if for that purpose, but quiet was presently restored, and it was found, that the applause had been given to the Lord Mayor, on his passage through the Hall.

At 20 minutes before seven, having been out an hour and 49 minutes, they returned into Court, and their names being called over,

Mr. Stirling, Clerk of the Crown Office, put the question— Gentlement of the Jury, by whom do you pronounce your verdict? By the mouth of your Foreman ?

The answer was given in the affirmaive.

Mr. Stirling— Gentlement, how say you? Is the Prisoner, James Watson, guilty or not guilty of the offence of High Treason with which he is charged?

Mr. Richardson- NOT GUILTY.

Mr. Stirling—You say he is Not Guilty; that is your verdict ; and so say you all. Gentlemen, how say you, is he guilty of flying from justice?

Mr Richardson— Not guilty, my Lord.

Mr. Stirling— You say the Prisoner is not guilty; this is your verdict; and so say you all.

A Barrister, drawing aside the green curtain, instantly called out towards the Hall —" Acquitted." He was heard only by a small part of the company, but their plaudits immediately made it known to the others, and were re-echoed fromn all parts of the Hall. The intellidence spread rapidly through Palace-yard and the adjoining streets. It was impossible to walk in the neighbourhoud without hearing the words a hundred times in five minutes.

Lord Ellenborough looked round this Court, as if his Lordship, in the first iattrennts of the impression made by the verdict, seemed to think the plaudits proceeded from a part of the audience there ; buthis Lordship soon perceived that the utmost decorum prevailed within its doors.

As soon as silence was obtained, Mr. Watson asked permission to say a few words. One or two gentlemen near him intimated, that as his Counsel, Mr. Wetherall, had withdrawn, this might not be proper, but the Court appeard willing to hear him. Mr. Watson, bowing respectfully to the Jury, said, "Gentlemen, I thank you much."

*Lord Ellenborough* asked the Attorney-General if he had any other charge against the prisoner ? The Attorney-General answered, "No, my Lord."

Mr. Watson was then discharged; but, as the pladits continued in the Hall, Lord Ellenborough expressed a wish that the Jury should wait a little time before they withdrew; and Mr. Watson, appearing to feel that the reason of the request might extend to him, also remained in Court. When he withdrew it was through the vaulted passage, which leads to Old Palace-yard, whence he passed with Mr. Harmer to Millbank.

In the mean time, the carriage, which had been drawn up near the door of the Hall to convey Mr. Watson back to the Tower, if that had been permitted by the verdict, was removed, and the Hom Guards who attended it, retired.

In Spring Gardens Mr. Harmer and Mr. Watson were recognized and cheered.

COURT OF KING'S BENCH, TUESDAY.

Up to an advanced period of this morning it was supposed that the proceedings already instituted against the remaining State Prisoners would be carried on to trials, and a Jury were summmoned yesterday, who remained in Court all this morning under that expectation.

At one o'clock Arthur THistlewood, Richard Hooper and Thomas Preston, were brought into Court, amidist the loudest acclamations, and placed at the bar, under the care of the Yeoman of the Guard, as usual. They were all dressed in black. At twenty minutes before one the Attorney-General and Solicitor-General had entered the Court, when the following Jury were impannelled—

John Franklin, John Hunter, John Kemp, Alex Chapp, George Barber, Charles Hewitt, John Rose, Robert Hartley, Joseph Smith, Williame Fell, William Gurdler Muthlow, and Wm. Cleghorn.

The Attorney-General then addressed the Court as follows :—

" May it please your Lordships,

" It becomes my duty to inform the Court, that it is not my intention to call any witnesses to support the charge against the prisoners."

Lord Ellenborough—" Gentlemen of the Jury— as no evidence is offered by his Majesty's Attorney-General against the prisoners, it becomes your duty to find them Not Guilty."

Clerk of the Court —" Gentlemen, are Arthur Thistlewood, Richard Hooper, and Thonmas Preston, found guilty of the Treason whereof they stand indicted, or not guilty ?"

Foreman of the Jury.-" Not Guilty."

Clerk of the Court.—" How say you, did they fly from justice?"

Foreman of the Jury.—" No."

Lord Ellenborough—" Mr. Attorney General, have you any further charge against the prisoners ?"

The Attorney-General—" I have no other charge My Lord."

Lord Ellenborough—" You say you have no further charge—therefore I shall order then forthwith to be discharged."

Mr. Harmer now conducted the prisoners out of the Court the back way behind the Bench, under the Piazzas of the House of Lords. An immense concourse of people were waiting in Palace-yard, in expectation that they would come out that way, but one or two persons recognized them under the Piazzas, and immediately, by their shouts, made known heir discovery to those in front of Westminster Hall.


----
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000076/18170621/007/0003?browse=true
Leeds Mercury - Saturday 21 June 1817

p3

IN the House of Lords on Monday, LORD LIVERPOOL, in answer to the inquiries of EARL GREY, distinctly admitted that MR. OLIVER was an agent employed by Ministers, for the purpose of detecting conspiracies; but it is now evident, from numerous facts, that this spy, finding no materials for his occupation in any existing plots, actively engaged in the fabrication of them, and that on the most extensive scale. This diabolical plot against the lives and liberties of his Majesty's subjects has already been the subject of investigation by the Magistracy of this Riding, the proceedings and result of which is a flattering confirmation of the accuracy of the statement we presented to the public on this subject. We trust that it will also become the subject of Parliamentary inquiry: the honour and dignity of Parliament, the safety of the country, and the character of the Executive Government, are deeply implicated in probing this matter to the bottom. Ministers, if innocent of any participation in this plot, ought most zealoulsy to aid this investigation. To oppose inquiry will be to involve themselves in the foul suspicions; for should it appear that Ministers have, we do not say participated in the plot, (for that would be the blackest treason) but even by their negligence connived at it ;-if, on the first intimation of the misconduct of their agent, they did not instantly recall him, and if, on proof of his guilt, they persist in protecting him, it will be the duty of Parliament to address the PRINCE REGENT, to remove these ministers for ever from his councils. This, indeed, on other grounds, would be a consummation most devoutly to be wished. The Secret Committee of the House of Commons have not yet made their Report, and it is suggested in the *Times*, that an investigation into the case of OLIVER ought to precede the delivery of their report. OLIVER himself will, no doubt, be called before the Committee, who will probably find it their duty to hand him over to that confinement in which he has been the means of insolving so many innocent men.


---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000076/18170614/006/0003?browse=true
Leeds Mercury
Saturday 14 June 1817

POLITICAL INSURRECTION IN YORKSHIRE

In the second edition of our last publication, we stated some particulars, which had just reached us, of a rumoured insurrection in this district, and also the arrest of ten persons near Dewsbury, on a charge of treasonable practices. We shall now proceed to lay before our readers all the information which we have been able to collect upon the subject, and our researches have been conducted with great diligence, with perfect impartiality, and with the most anxious wish to come at the truth. We shall first shortly state what appears to have been the object and extent of the plot, and then detail those circumstances which either attended its developement, or which have subsequently occurred. It appears, that almost immediately after the suppression of the Union Societies, established in different towns in this district for effecting a reform in Parliament, some of the most violent members associated together, in a private and clandestine manner. At these meetings it is supposed to have become a question for deliberation, whether a change in the representation might not be effected without the intervention of Parliament, and a project to effect this purpose appears to have been communicated to them by Mr. Oliver, who had been introduced to these Ultra Reformers by Mitchell, (a Delegate, now in custody,) as a person deserving their confidence, and not only disposed to comnmunicate to them interesting information as to the state of the country; but able to afford them the most affectual assistance ; thus recommended, he soon possessed himself of their unbound confidence. This person is said to have represented to these credulous men, that all the people in the metropolis were favourable to a complete change of Government, that every thing was organised, and that it was absolutely settled, that on the night preceding the trial of the state prisoners, (the night of the 8th June,) a general rising, would take place; that as a consequence of this movement, all the public offices were to be taken possession of, all the constituted authorities seized, and the state prisoners released ; and that a plan had also been arranged for securing all the military, by which means a change in the government would be effected, without any effusion blood. It was further represented to them, that in order to carry out this bloodless revolution, it was absolutely necessary that the same plan should be simultaneously acted upon in all parts of the country ;- that it was therefore necessary, that on the night agreed upon, namely on Sunday the 8th inst. all the military in every district of the kingdom should be secured in their quarters, their arms seized, and that the magistrates and other civil officers should be arrested and placed in a state of restraint, not merely that no opposition might be made to the designs of the insurgents, but that they might serve as hostages for the safety of such of their own party as might fall into the hands of government. This absurd and wicked project is said to have been entertained, and in some degree acted upon, by a number of imdividuals in different parts of this district ; and a participation in this plot is alleged against the persons who were apprehended yesteday se'nnigh, at Thornill Lees, charged with having assembled there, for the purpose of carrying into immediate effect this daring and traitorous project. Our readers will probably infer, from this statement, that the person introduced by Mitchell to the Ultra Reformers, was, in truth, a spy, and that every step taken towards the execution of the project, had been communicated to persons in authority, as th6eplot appears to have been known by some of the Magistrates for several weeks past. On Friday morning last, several of the Delegates, together with the informer, met at a public house, in this town, and proceeded in the direction of Dewsbury, and from thence to Thornhill Lees, where they had no sooner arrived at the house of rendesvous than they were surrounded by a detachment of Yeomanry Cavalry, and taken into custody. The following is a correct list of the names and paces of redisence of the persons apprehended:

John Smaller, shoemaker, Horbury, near Wakefield.  
Thomas Murray, Flax-Weaver, Leeds.  
James Mann, Cloth-Dresser, Leeds.  
Thomas Wood, Clothier, Westgate Common, Wakefield.  
Michael Waller, a Publican, and formerly keeper of the Yew-Tree, Robert-Town.
Miles Illingworth, Carpenter, Manningham, near Bradford.  
Benjamin Whitley. Cloth-Dresser, Holmfirth.  
Edward Fletcher, Card-Maker, High-Town.  
Joseph Midgley, Clothier, Almondbury.  
Wm. Walker, Clothier, Thornhill, near Dewsbury.

The prisoners were immediatedy conveyed in carriages, escorted by the Yeomanry Cavalry, to Wakefield, and lodged in the Court-House, where they were examined for several hours by Sir Francis Lindley Wood, Bart. Benjamin Dealtry,Esq, and other magistrates there assembled. The examination wsa private; some circumstances have, however, transpired, which we shall state. It was asserted by one of the witnesses examined, that in a barn at Whitley, near the place of meeting, there were deposited one hundred pikes, and 50 stand of fire arms; it was further stated by the same witness, that in the house of John Smaller, of Horbury, would be found a quantity of ball cartridges. Messengers were instantly dispatched to search both these places, and it is important to state, that, on removing the straw in the barn, not a single pike or fire arm could be discovered, and it was the opinion of the persons who searched the premises, that the straw had not been disturbed for a considerable time. That part of the evidence which related to the ball cartidges was also falsified, nothing of the kind having been found in the house of Smaller. We have introduced the result of these important searches in this place, though, in the order of the narrative, it ought to have been introduced somewhat later. The Court-House at Wakefield, was surrounded by an immense assemblage of persons during the whole of the examination. About eight o'clock the prisoners were remanded until Monday, to the House of Correction, for further examination. They were escorted by the cavalry, who were dismounted, the escort was attacked by the populace with stones, brick-bats, &c. thrown with great violence. The prisoners were, however, safely lodged tn the House of Correction.

On Saturday, the succeeding day, two troops of the 13th regiment of Light Dragoons arrived in this town, from York, and that day and Sunday passed over without the slightest indication of insubordination, though not without alarm ; for about midnight on Sunday, the town was thrown into the greatest consternation by the bugle sounding for the Cavalry, who remained on duty at he Court-House all night, in consequence of some alarming reports which had reached the magistrates, (who were also at the Court-House,) of an intention to rescue the prisoners at Wakfield. An express was immediately sent there to call out the Yeomanry Cavalry, who instantly assembled and continued on duty all day. No attempts at release were made, and the day passed over at Wakefield in tranquillity. We regret, however, to state, that an attempt was made in the neighbourhood of Huddersfield, to assassinate one of the Yeomanry Cavalry, about one o'clock on Monday morning, by firing a loaded pistol, the ball of which lodged irn the forehead of the horse belonging to Mr. Alexander, of Huddersfield, but the ball has been extracted, and the horse is likely to recover. We understand that an outrage of a similar nature, was committed the same night, at Ossett, a village near Dewsbury, where the house of a member of the Yeomanry Cavalry was beset by a number of persons who demanded his arms, and on his refusal to give them up, fired several shots into the house. Five persons have been apprehended at Huddersfield, and its neighbourhood, on a charge of being concerned in the former of these daring outrages.— They have since been committed to York Castle, on a charge of malicious firing: they passed through this place yesterday afternoon, accompanied by an escort of the Huddersfield Yeomannry Cavalry.

The following is a list of their names and residence:

Abram Oldbarn, and John Oldham, of Honley.  
Isaac Johnson, and Joshua Knowles, of Holmfirth.  
John Rhodes, (late of Holbeck), Holmfirth.  

The re-examination of the prisoners charged with High Treason, took place at the House of Correction, in Wakefield, on Monday, where the Magistrates were holding a special Session for enquiring into the state of that gaol. The number of gentlemen on the Commission who attended on this occasion was uncommonly great, among others, were Sir F. L. Wood, Bart. Rev. W. R. Hay, (Chairman of the Manchester Sessions,) Rev. Wm. Wood, Benjamin Dealtry, Esq. and Benj Haigh Allen, Esq., Wm. Prest, Esq. the Mayor of this borough, was also present. This examination was, in the strictest sense, private, as no person, except the Magistrates, was suffered to remain in the room during the discussion of this subject. The prisoners were merley examined *pro forma*; they were brought into the room separately, and informed that their further examination was deferred until the following Monday, until which time they were re-committed. No witnesses were examined affecting the prisoners, and the meeting might rather be termed a Committee of inquiry, than a meeting of Justices for the judicial examination of prisoners. It may be presumed from this unusually long adjouranment of the examination, that no evidence has yet been given against the prisoners which can warrant their committal for High Treason, and it is reasonable the re-committal has been with the view of detaining them until instructions can be received from government as to to their ultimate disposal. We understand that some important papers have been found in the House of James Mann, the Leeds Delegate. In using the term *delegate*, we do not mean to insinuate that these persons have been elected by any body of men whatever; there is no evidence of any such delegation, and the probability is, that they represent nobody but themselves. We think it right to make this remark, lest it should be supposed that they were delegated by the places where they appear to be resident, which would have given a very formidable aspect to this plot, and a degree of importance to which it is by no means entitled. The conspiracy appears to have been confined to a relatively small numnber of persons, and was of a nature which the laws of the country afforded ample means to suppress. It appears also to have been of a very recent date, and to have originated in the injudiciouts, and we will add, unconstitutional measures adopted by Ministers to seek the expression of the public feeling relative to a  Reform in Parliament. It must be further remembered, that the account we have given of the plot must be considered in the nature of an *ex-parte* statement, and must rest for its credibility, very considerably, on the reliance which can be placed on the witnesses, who do not come before the public in a light which entitle them to much credit, and whose evidence has been materially broken in upon, by circumstances stated in the above account. It must be further recollected, that all the persons apprehended are of the lowest class of society,illiterate, and ill-informed, and liable to be the dupes of designing men. The great mass of the people are, we are convinced, free from any knowledge or concurrence in the plot. In short, when the whole is dispassionately considered, there appears no ground for that excessive panic and alarm which the first announcement of the plot produced, much less does afford any legitimate ground for a renewed suspension of the Constitutional rights of the people.

We feel great satisfaction in having to state that the most perfect tranquillity has prevailed here during the whole of the past week, and that the alarm by which the announcement of so many plots had produced, has nearly subsided.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000076/18170614/006/0003?browse=true
Leeds Mercury - Saturday 14 June 1817
p3
SECOND EDITION

Since the first edition of our paper was prepared for the press, the highly important fact has been communicated to us, from a respectible, quarter, that the plot referred to in the above statement has been got up under the instigation of an agent from London, and that the principlal offender has been suffered to escape with impunity. In confirmation of this fact, which was communicated to us at a late hour yesterday afternoon, we were referred to Mr. Willans, a bookseller, in Dewsbury. To develop a transaction so important, not only to the Government and the people of this country in general, but so intimately connected with the liberty and lives of the accused, we felt it to be our imperious duty to repair to Dewsbury, without a moment's delay, and there to ascertain, on the spot, the truth of the allegation.

As a precautionary measure, we drove to the house of one of the first merchant-manufacturers in the town, and Mr. Willans be sent for, he suggested, that in order to render the investigation complete, Mr. John Dickinson, a linen-draper in that place, should be invited to attend. This suggestion being adopted, Mr. Dickinson also attended, and the following is the result of our investigaitons into the mysterious transactions which formed the subject of our inquiry:—

Mr Willans stated, and the truth of his assertions his is willing to confirm by his solemn affirmation, that, about two months ago, a person of the name of *Oliver*, called upon him, and introduced himself as a Parliamentary Reformer, sent form London, to ascertain the dispositions of the people in the country. This man he describes as a person of genteel appearance and good address, nearly six feet high, of erect figure, light hair, red and rather large whiskers, and a full face a little pitted with the small-pox. His usual dress, he says, was a light fashionable coloured brown coat, black waistcoat, dark blue mixture pantaloons, and Wellington boots. The description of such a characer is important, and may form a clue to fuurther discoveries, connected with his proceedings in other parts of the country.

Mr. Oliver, he says, called upon him several times after his first introduction, and in one of his subsequent calls, said, that as it was quite obvious that Government would not listen to the petitions of the people, it had now become necessary that they should be compelled to attend to their demands. These insinuations Mr. Willans silenced by the observation, that he could not enagage in any proceeding that implied the use of force, or the shedding of human blood. On another occasion, Mr. Oliver told him, that he (Oliver) was one of a committee of five that effected the escape of young Watson, and that if Thistlewood had had equally prudent counsels, he would also have escaped. In fact, the whole tenor of Oliver's conversation went to show that he had traitorous designs, and that he was in league with traitors.

Such conversation, as might be supposed, awaked Mr. Willans's suspicions, and the intercourse between them had almost ceased, when, on Friday morning last, the day the ten persons were arrested at Thornhill Lees near Dewsbury, he again called at Mr. Willan's shop between 10 and 11 o'clock, and Mr. W. being absent on business, he begged that his wife would tell him, that a meeting of delegates was to be held on that day, at Thornhill, and earnestly requested that she would use her influence to prevail upon her husband to attend. Before Oliver quitted Dewsbury to attend the meeting, he called again at the shop, when he found Mr. Willans had returned. He accordingly renewed his solicitations to Mr. W. to attend the meeting, telling him at the same time, that "*his friends in London "were almost heart-broken that the people in the country were so quiet.*" At the same time he informed him, that he had walked over from Leeds that morning, and two persons supposed to be Leeds men, appeared in his train. Unmoved by Oliver's solicitations, Mr. Willans persisted in his resolution not to attend the meeting, and owing to his obstinacy, Dewsbury was prevented from swelling the number of *deputies*, so called.

At the appointed time, the meeting was held at Thornhill Lees, and the toils being set, eleven deputies, Mr. Oliver being of the number, were taken by a detachment of cavalry, and all except Mr. Oliver, who had the *good fortune* to be liberated, were conveyed to Wakefield in custody.

While the examinations were proceeding at the Court-House, Mr. Oliver had repaired to his quarters, which were at the Strafford-Arms, that is, the head inn in Wakefield. Here, to his great consternation and confusion, he was recognized by Mr. John Dickinson, who had seen him at Dewsbury, and had heard that he was a leading man at the private meetings. Advancing up to Oliver, Mr. Dickinson addressed him, and the following conversation took place:

*Mr. Dickinson.* How does it happen, Mr. Oliver, that you, who appear to have taken so leading a part in the meetings, are at liberty, while your associates are likely to be sent in custody to London?

*Mr. Oliver.* No papers were found upon me, and being a *stranger*, the persons who apprehended us were obliged to set me at liberty.

These observations were made in a very hurried manner, and Mr. Oliver withdrew to take a seast in the Wakefiled coach to Leeds.

As soon as Mr. Oliver had placed himself in the coach, a servant in livery stepped up to him, and, moving his hat, entered into conversation with him.

This circumstance, combined with the extraordinary reasons that Oliver had given for his liberation, induced Mr. Dickinson to inquire of the servant, after the coach had left the inn, if he knew that Gentleman ? to which the servant replied, that he had seen him at Campsall, and he had driven him a few days before in his master's tandem from that place to the Red-house to meet the coach. On receiving this information, Mr. Dickinson eqnuired who his master was ? to which the servant replied, General Byng. He then left him, and asked Mr. Tyler, who keeps the Strafford Arms, if he knew Oliver ? to which Mr. Tyler replied, that he had been there several times — that he believed he was form London — and that several London letters had come directed to him at that inn.

From every thing we have heard of the character and conduct of General Byng, we are persuaded that he has been merely the medium for receiving Oliver's information, and that whoever may have employed this double-distilled traitor, the General has acted merely in the discharge of his official duty. But every circumstance we have just related, proves, that somebody has employed him, and the question is— who were his employers?

What the trade of this man may be, we cannot pretend to say—but that he is a *Green Bag Maker* by profession is, we think, sufficiently obvious. Why such a wretch, the main spring and master-piece of the conspiracy, by which the country has been thrown into its present state of alarm and agitation, was suffered to escape, while the poor unfortunate victims of his machinations are held in confinement, is more than we can say; but the subject requires deep and grave investigation, and we call upon the magistrates of this riding, now that we have given them the clue, to go to the bottom of this nefarious transaction.

We ask this boon from them in support of their own character— we ask it from a regard to the character of the country— we ask it from a regard to the Government— we ask it in justice to the advocates of Parliamentary Reform— and above all, we conjure them to enter into this inquiry, from a regard to all the families and the lives of the men at present in confinement, on the information of this prototype of Lucifer, whose distinguishing characteristic it is, first to tempt and then to destroy.

We have been favoured with the following extract of a letter received yesterday from Nottingham, by a Mercantile house in this town :-

"*Nottingham, June 12th, 1817.*

An insurrection was fully expected by the Magistrates to have begun here on the 9th inst. We remained, however, perfectly quiet ; but on the 10th, a great number of persons out of Derbyshire, armned with pikes and guns, which they stole on their route, approached this place: they advanced as far as Eastwood (8 miles distant) where they were encountered by Mr. Rolleston, a very active county Magistrate, supported by a troop of dragoons, when they immediately fled in all directions, leaving about 26 of their number prisoners, who were conducted forthwith to the County gaol ; one person was shot dead by the *insurgents* for not delivering up his arms when required, and another was shot by accident; these, we believe, are all the casualties that have occurred. We are perfectly quiet at present, and the Magistrates are very active. We hope, therefore, that there is an end of the business."

The neighbourhood of Huddersfield was thrown into consternation on Sunday night, by an attack made about 12 o'clock, on six of the horse-patrole, at Folly-Hall Bridge, near that place, by a number of men with arms. A volley was fired, and one of the horses struck on thre head, by a ball, which has since been extracted. The patrole finding their number too small to attack their adverdaries, retired after a shot had been fired by Mr. Alexander, the person whose horse was wounded; and by the time the main body with the infantry reached the place, the whole of the assailants had dispersed.

...

The Secret Committee of the House of Commons, which is expected to recommend the continued Suspension of the *Habeas Corpus* Act, was appointed on Thursday. It differs only from, the former Committee in the substitutiom of the present Solicitior-General for the late Attorney-General. ...

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18170621/010/0003
Leeds Mercury
Saturday 21 June 1817
p3

EXPLODED PLOTS.

The inquisition made in our last paper of the plotters against the public tranquility, has produced a sensation in the Metropolis – the Senate – and the nation at large, that has seldom been exceeded. One of its first effects was to procure the liberation of the the principal part of the persons charged with holding a a political meeting for treasonable purposes, at Thornill Lees, in this county ; and the magistrates of the West Riding, with a proper regard to their own characters and to the public interest, have done themselves lasting honour, by setting at liberty the men, whom a perfidious conspirator, acting under a superior agency, had marked out for his victims. By this exposure, the secret springs of a diabolical conspiracy, not of the people, but against the people, have been laid bare. The real conspirators have been exhibited to public view.

The nature and the objects of the plots have been disclosed, and all the trepidation and alarm with which the public had been seized, have given way to an universally felt indignation against the alarmists and their emissaries. The effect has been almost magical. The blow aimed at the friends to reform, has been made, by a retributive recoil, to fall upon the heads of their adversaries, and every manl with an English heart in his bosom, whatever his party or his political predilections, feels himself insulted and outraged by the attempts made to convert the most populous and important part of the kingdom into a scene of conspiracies, and his countrymen into a nation of traitors.

The account published in the second edition of our last paper, and which will be found in the parliamentary proceedings of the present week, has proved to be in every important particular correct. From that account it appeared — that the Yorkshire Plot was *got up* by a political agent of the name of Oliver, from London— that this man, under the guise of an ardent zeal for the cause of Parliamentary Reform, did not hesitate to suggest to Mr. Willans, a bookseller, at Dewsbury, the propriety and necessity of resorting to force for the purpose of compelling Government to grant that by coercion, which they were disinclined to concede to petitions. That, on the day when the meeting  at Thornhill was appointed to be held, he endeavoured, by the most urgent entreaties, to prevail upon Mr. Willans to attend that meeting, and that in the course of conversation, he told Mr. W. that "his" Mr. Oliver's "friends in London were almost heart-broken that the people in the country were so quiet." Who Mr. Oliver's friends, or at least his employers, are, the Earl of Liverpool has, with great candour, informed the country ; but why they should be so much disquieted at the tranquility of the people, we shall not pretend to conjecture. It further appeared, from the statement above referred to, that Mr. Willans refused to attend the meeting at Thornihill, and that Dewsbury was thereby deprived of a *deputy*. Whatever might be the disinclination of Mr. Willans to attend the meeting, Mr. Oliver, it seems, was not actuated by the same motives — he attenided— was taken into custody along with ten other delegates, and was suffered to escape "because he was a stranger, and had no papers about him." The next appearance of this stranger was at Wakefield, on the day and at the moment when the persons apprehended with him were under examinataion before the magistrates at that place, and there it was discovered by a singular train of incidents, that a few days before the meeting at Thornhill, Oliver was at the house of General Sir John Byng, the commander of the district, and that he was conveyed in the General's tandem to meet the coach, which bore him to the scene of lhisils delinquencies. This discovery, so fortunate for the country, will be considered as a special interposition of a Superintending Power, in favour of the country; and we may say with truth, "the finger of Providence was there."

On this part of the exposure a few observations will suffice. Every link of the chain of evidence is perfect. The conduct of Oliver, the informer, admits of no further disguise-it is perfectly clear that he instigated persons to attend at Thornhill, on the day in question, and there is reason to suppose that he himself appointed the meeting. What were his instructions we cannot say, but he is completely identified with men in an official situation, by a species of evidence that scarcely stood in need of the admission made by Lord Liverpool, that he was an agent of Government. But, says his Lordship, the account in the Leeds Mercury is an *ex parte* statement, and as such must not be implicitly relied upon. That is true, my Lord, and our anxiety is, that it should no longer be *ex parte*. We invite your Lordship to deprive it of this character, by a rigorous investigation into all the facts of the case; and this investigation, we beseech your Lordship and your colleagues to institute, before the Suspension Bill, founded upon these alleged conspiracies, is suffered to advance another stage in its progress. Whether the bill to renew to Ministers the power of exercising a despotic control over the liberties of their countrymen, has produced the plots, or the plots have produced the bill, it is not our present busneess to inquire ; but we feel it our duty to say, as a circumstance coming within our own knowledge, that, in the inquiries which we made at Dewsbury, the day before the facts we have developed were laid before for the public, we never recollect to have heard a witness give his evidence, even in a court of justice, and upon oath, with a more scrupulous regard to truth than Mr. Willans. If he erred, as he certainly did, in suffering a traitor like Oliver to come near his house, after he had, by insinuation, communicated his villainouss designs, he has made ample reparation to his country for his error, by having first declined to attend a meeting, the object of which he considered to be mischievous, and then, by making those disclosures, even at the risk of the obloquy to which they were sure to subject him, which have tended to put down a system of *espionage*, contemplating first the seduction of his Majesty's subjects from their allegiance, and then the destruction of the seduced and the extinction of public liberty. Mr. Dickinson's evidence, which was given with the utmost frankness, Lord Liverpool has confirmed, by the acknowledgement that Oliver was an agent of Government, and in that capacity, it seems, was in communication with the commander of the district.

Mr. Oliver, thee political incendiary, made his first appearance in Yorkshire about nine or ten weeks ago, accompanied by one Mitchell, a Liverpool *delegate*, (now in custody) under the assumed character of a zealous Parliamentary Reformer, whose object it was to ascertain the dispositions of the people, and to give to the sluggish current of public feeling a due degree of fervour. On his arrival in Wakefiled, by the True Briton Coach, he called upon Mr. Benjamin Scholes, a publican in that place, a person who had taken a leading part in a meeting recently held, for the purpose of petitioning the Legislature, for a Reform in the representation of the people, and as a specimen of the manner in which Mr. Oliver executed his mission, we shall state the substanc of a deposition made by Mr. Scholes, before J. P. Heywood, Esq. one of the magistrates of this riding:—

TESTIMONY OF MR. SCHOLES.

On his first interview with Mr. Scholes, Oliver said, that he was charged to present Sir Francis Burdett's compliments to him, and to inform him that he was delegated by the Baronet, Lord Cochrane, Major Cartwright, Mr. Hunt, and other gentlemen, to examine into the state of the country, and to learn whether the country meant to sit down with their petitions being rejected or not. Mr. Scholes said, he could not speak for others, but for himself he must say, that though he believed he was among the most zealous of the Parliamentary Reformers in Wakefield, he would go as far as petitioning went, but no further. Somse conversation then took place on the subject of the Wakefield petition, on which Oliver observed, that " it was very good, but it did not go far enough." Mr Scholes replied that they did not mean to interfere any further, and he referred Mr. Oliver, for information as to the views of the reformers, to Mr. Hurst, the printer of the Wakefield Journal, Mr. Dealtry, at one of the West Riding Magistrates, Mr. Egremont, a gentleman of independent fortune in the neighbourhood, and other gentlemen, who had signed the petition. Mr. Scholes cannot say whether Oliver applied to these gentlemen, but in point of fact we believe he did not. His dupes were to be found among the distreseed and the ignorant, and it was to those principally that he addressed himnself. Oliver then requested Mr. Scholes to furnish him with the names of such persons, in the neighbouring villages, as were favourable to Reform, which he did, and, amongst others, he mentioned John Smaller, of Horbury. Having thus far felt his way, Oliver next proposed to Mr. Scholes that he should accompany him to Manchester and Liverpool, on his political mission, and promised that he would both pay his expenses, and satisfy him for his trouble. This proposal Mr. Scholes declined. Some time after Oliver again called at Mr. Scholes's, and proposed a walk into the country, to examine the newly erected asylum, stating that he had some skill in architecture. During their walk the subject of Parliamentary Reform was resumed, and Oliver observed that Sir Francis Burdett and the other gentlemen by whom he was delegated were astonished that the country was not more alive to the subject of Parliamentary Reform. "I asked him," says Mr. Scholes, " what he meant by being alive," and he replied, "*if petitioning will not do, we must use physical force*." "Physical force," rejoined Mr.  Scholes, indignantly, " the country must not be thrown into a state of insubordination, and I will have nothing to do with plunging the country into anarchy." Thus repulsed , Mr. Oliver dropped the conversation. The third and last time that Mr. Oliver called upon Mr. Scholes, it was for the purpose of inviting him to attend a meeting which Oliver said he had appointed, at Penistone, in this Riding, for discussing a plan of Parliamentary Reform. This meeting Mr. Scholes positively refused to attend, telling Oliver, at the same time, that he believed he was a bad man, and that he would not only not attetid this meeting himself, but he would also dissuade any other persons, over that whom he might have any influence, from attending it. He further asked him his reason for staying so long in this part of the country, as he must be satisfied that his project of resorting to force would not be encouraged. Oliver replied, that he did not dare to return to London till the State Trials were over, and, on being asked the cause of his fears, he said he had assisted young Watson in effecting his escape. In this conversation Oliver expressed himself dissatisfied with the apathy of the country, in proof of proof of which, he said he had appointed two meetings at Huddersfleld, and when he got there not a single individual had attended. At parting, Mr. Scholes said and to Oliver, "Now. Sir, I beg, that from this time, you will never call upon me again." In the course of the evening, several men, who were drinking in Mr. Scholes's house, told him that Oliver had appointed a meeting at Penistone the next day, and asked him his opinion of Oliver and his measures ; to which he replied, "for God's Sake keep from Oliver and his meetings, for he is a base villain."

From the period of the Penistone meeting, which, we believe, was held on the 1st of June, till the eve of the Thornhill meeting on the 6th of June, we have no specific information respecting the operations of Mr. Oliver, but we understand, that a little before the time of the former meeting, this incenditiay made a journey to London, and that, in the interval, he was travelling about in the counties of Nottinghiam, Derbyshire, Staffordshire, and Lancasihire, lahouring, no doubt, in his vocation. For the honour of human nature, we hope that the use made by Mr. Oliver of the names of Sir Francis Burdett, Major Cartwright, and others, was not authorized by Ministers ; but after such a specimen of the vile arts employed to traduce the friends of Parliamentary Reform, we are not in future to be surprised at any caluminies that may be propagated against them.

We have already stated, from the testimony of Mr. Willans and Mr. Dickinson, how Mr. Oliver was engaged in some parts of the day on Friday, the 6th of June, and the grateful feelings of one of the persons discharged by the Magistrates on Monday, has afforded us a clue to his proceedings in the early as well as the more interesting parts of the same day. Last Tuesday morning, a person of the name of Thomas Murray, one of the Leeds *delegates*, so called, waited upon us, to exprees his acknowledgments, and the thanks of the persons who had been imprisoned with him in Wakefield House of Correction, for the services which they conceived we had rendered to them, in contributing to their liberation, by exposing the real conspirators. After he had explained his business, we inquired how it happened that he had attended the meeting at Thornhill, and what was the nature of his delegation ? To this he replied that he would explain the whole matter, as far as he was acquainted with the business, and the following narrative, which was delivered in the most artless manner, he is ready, we understand, to confirm upon oath:—

TESTIMONY OF THOMAS MURRAY.

THOMAS MURRAY is a linen-weaver, in the employment of Messrs. Benyon, Benyon, and Bage, of this platce, and says, that on Friday morning, the 6th of June,about half-past seven o'clock, he was standing near his master's works in Meadow-lane, near the junction of the two roads from Leeds to Dewsbury, to along with a young man of the name of Thomas Dovner, when a person with the appearance of a gentleman, answering to the description given of Mr. Oliver not in the second edition of the Leeds Mercury of last Saturday, walked up to them and inquired the road to Dewsbury. On the road being pointed out to him, he inquired how much further Thornhill was than Dewsbury, and was told two miles. He then asked Murray if he was out of employment ? and on being told that he was for that day, owing to the woman who asstied him in his business being obliged to remain at home to attend to her family; Oliver observed that he had some business at Thornhill, and being an *entire stranger* in that part of the country, he should be glad if he would accompany him and show him the way, for which services he would reward him, by paying his expenses, and satisfying him for his day's work. After some persuasions Murray was prevailed upon to go, and on their way to Dewsbury they regaled themselves at the public-house at Stump-Cross with a shillings'-worth of rum and milk, for which Oliver paid. During the journey the subject of politics was never introduced but once, and then Oliver informed his guide, that " Mr. Abbot was elevated to the Peerage, and he was glad of it, for he was an impartial clever little fellow." On their arrival at Dewsbury, Oliver went into a small bookseller's shop, (Mr. Willans's) and requestedl his guide to wait for him at the door. When he came out, he said, the person he wished to see was not in, and they then went into an adjoining public-house, where they again refreshed themselves at Mr. Oliver's expense. While they were in the house a woman came in, which Murray believes was Mr. Willans's wife, and said, that her husband had come in, on which Oliver immediately followed her into the bookseller's shop, and in the space of about a quarter of an hour returned. Murray and he then proceeded on their way to Thornhill, and when they had arrived in a lane about one hundred yards from the Sportsman's Arms, they saw three gentlemen, one of them being Major-General Sir John Byng, riding up to meet them at full speed. On their approach, Sir John advanced up to Oliver, and pointing with his finger, said, " I think I know you, Sir." Oliver, affecting to be overcome with fright, made no reply. Sir Jorn then said, "I have had an accurate description of to you from London  ! Sir, is not your name Oliver ?" Oliver still remained silent, and by the orders of Sir John he was surrounded by a party of cavalry and taken into custody. Sir John then called to another detachment of Yeomanry Cavalry, who were on the road, to stop Murray, which they did, and after driving him into the ditch, they dragged hin into the Sportsman's Arms public-house. Here they searched the person of the Leeds *Delegate*, but found not a single scrap of paper upon him. At that time there were about five or six persons in the room all in custudy, and he learned that they had all been picked up in different parts of the neighbourhood. When they had been in the public-house about half an hour, several post chaises, which seem to have been previously prepared, drove up to the door, and in them they were conveyed, under an escort of Yeomanry Cavalry, to the Court-house at Wakefield. From the time that Murray was apprehended, up to the period of his discharge, he never saw Oliver but once, and then he was brought into the room at the Sportsman's Arms in custody, but he had not remained there above half minute, when he was called out of the room by Sir John Byng, and never again appeared. After the examination at Wakefield, Murray and his fellow *delegates*, not one of whom, to the best of his knowledge, he had ever before seen, were comnmitted to the House of Correction, and were there kept for eleven days in solitary confinement, and on the prison allowance.

Such are the statements that we have received from the mouths of the persons whose names they bear. That they are in all their leadintg particulars correct, we have not the slightest doubt. They are published with the honest intention of tranquillizintg the public mind, of justifying the innocent, and of exposing the guilty. Had we consulted either our own ease, or our personal safety, we should have shrunk, in times like these, from the responsibility of this exposure, but there is a feeling of the mind paramount to all these considerations— a sense of public duty, and by that principle alone we have been actuated.

The same spirit of candid inquiry and love of truth, which has, we hope, displayed itself in every part of our conduct in these mysterious transactions, induces us to present our readers with the following letter addressed to the Editor of this paper, and received yesterday morning, from Major General Sir John Byng, the commander of the district.

LETTER OF GENERAL BYNG.

" St. James's Square, (London) June 18th, 1817.  
" Sir,-You have introduced my name into your last paper in such a manner as to induce me to desire the insertion, in your next, of the following statement:-

"You have suffered it to be inferred, that a person of the name of Oliver, was employed by me— that he entrapped the persons taken up at Thornhill-Leys, and that he left London with the view of exciting and fomoenting discontent and disturbance in different patts of the country. Not one word of this is true:— before Oliver left London, information had been transmitted tome, from Nottingham, of an intended rising in the manufacturing in the North of England and Scotland: this information was only a repetition of what I had reason to excpect for seveml of weeks, if the notion of Sir Francis Burdett, for a Reform in Parliament, should be rejected. The information from Nottingha was subsequently corroborated so fully to me from various quarters, and the 9th of June being from all fixed upon as the period of rising, I was induced, on Monday the 2d of June, to wait upon Sir Francis Wood, and communicate to him what I knew, who deemed my information of sufficient importance to propose a meeting of the Magistracy at Barnsley, for Friday, the 6th. On Wednesday, the 4th, I, for the first time, saw or heard from Oliver, who gave me some information corrobrative of that I had before received, and further told me that there would be a meeting of delegates at Cleckheaton on Friday, the 6th. Mr. Parker communicated, on the 5th., to Sir Francis Wood and myself, that he had at Shieffield information given, upon oath, that a meeting of persons, who were finally to decide upon the plan for the 9th, would be held at the Sportsman's Arms, at Thornhill Lees, at 11, on Friday the 6th, and suggested the propriety of arresting these delegates, to prevent the fatal consequences which might ensue on the 9th:— this suggestion was agreed to at Barnsley, on the morning of the 6th. When the Magistrate' (Mr. Chandler) and myself arrived at Thornhill, although some time after the hour of the proposed meeting, Oliver was not come, having been deceived as to the place of the meeting, which, as I have before stated, he expected was to be at Cleckheaton, and so far from having entrappied the men arrested, he only knew one of them by name, (which, in fairness to the individual, I will not here insert). He neither knew the real place of meetng, nor the persons assembled, and was consequently not brought before the magistrates to confirm their other evidence.

"With respect to the alleged conversation with Mr. Dickenson and Mr. Willan, I cannot speak, as I confiine myself to facts ; but I have to remark, that what  is imputed to Oliver by them, is a direct contradiction to what he stated as his general line of conduct, and is quite contrary to what he considered his instructions, which were confined solely to give any Magistrate, or myself, information necessary for preserving the peace of the country.

"It only remains for me to add, that I am not empowered to hire any person— that I have never, directly or indirectly, paid any thing for the information I have received, which has hitherto been communicated to me from respectable authority, and from a far better motive than any mercenary consideration.

"I am, Sir,  
"Your humble Servant,  
"JOHN BYNG, Major-General."  
To Mr. Edward Baines, at the Mercury-Office, Leeds."

In justice to ourselves, it is proper to remnark, that in our paper of last week, we stated facts, rather than drew inferences, and that not one of those facts has been shaken by the above letter. We did not say that " Oliver was employed by General Byng to entrap the persons taken up at Thornhill Lees." On the contrary, we said, that " from every thing we has heard of the character and conduct of General Byng, we were persuaded that he had been merely the medium for receiving Oliver's inforomation, and that whoever might have employed him, the General had merely acted in the discharge of his official duty" Nor did we state that Oliver "left London with the view of exciting and fomenting disturbances in different parts of the country." We could not dive into the dark recesses of Oliver's mind, and it was as impossible for us to know with what views he left London, as it must be for General Byng to speak to the same fact. But with whatever views he left London, or whatever might be the nature of the instructions he received from Ministers on his departure, we think that, after the exposure which it has fallen to our lot to make of his nefarious practices, both General Byng and the country must now be convinced, that this profligate informer has excited and fomented disturbances in different parts of the country, and in the words of the Wakefield Journal, " that had there been no Mr. Oliver there would have been no plot." That there is a great mass of dissatisfaction in the country, and that rumours of the nature alluded to in General Byng's letters, will continue to prevail as long as the public distress prevails, cannot be doubted; but that there was any concerted plan for a rising of the people, till Mr. Oliver and his co-adjutors came into the country, and injected their treasons into the minds of the people, would, we apprehend, be very difficult to prove. Even with Mr. Oliver's assistance, the meeting at Thornhill, if a meeting it could be called, was a most pitiful assembly, and General Byng, we are convinced, when he saw the materials of which that meeting was composed, must have perceived, that all apprehensions of the West Riding of Yorkshire being three days afterwards thrown into a state of insurrection, were utterly groundless. When the General uses the word *delegates*, he must, we presume, apply it in the popular and not in the correct acceptation of the term. It is our firm conviction, that not a single individual present, Mr. Oliver alone excepted, was clothed with delegated powers. The narrative of Thomas Murray, given above, proves very clearly what sort of delegation he possessed ; and from every thing we can learn, we are persuaded, that the other delegates just as much represented the places where they happened to reside, as Thomas Murray represented the town of Leeds. General Byng's mode of aceetnstitig for Oliver's late attendance at the meeting, is proved by the testimony of Murray to be incorrect, (unintentionally so, no doubt.) We find this man in Leeds, twelve miles only from the place of meeting at half-past, seven o'clock in the morning of Friday, the 6th of June, inquiring, not for *Cleckheaton*, but for *Dewsbury* amnd *Thornhill*; and we find also, from the concurrent testimony of Mr. Willans and Thomas Murray, that the principal cause of his late attenndance was, his wish to seduce Mr. Willans to attend that meeting, to which he had, by a different artifice, decoyed Thomas Murray. General Byng's disavowal of the possession of any powers to hire persons to give him information, we do not call in question, though we do not perceive the propriety of making such a disclaimer, when the conduct of a confessedhy *hired* spy is under discussion. It is a matter of perfect indifference to the public, whether Mr. Oliver's remunueration stands under the head of " Secret Service Money," or of "Army Estimates."

The observation of Lord Liverpool, that Mr. Oliver was sent by Government to discover, and not to form plots, may be true, but a first Minister of State ought to know, that when a spy cannot find a plot, he will make one ; and when he knows that his employers have a *Green Bag* to fill, he will not fail to present them with his well-timed contributions. But Lord Liverpool, in some of the reports of his speech, says, that if Oliver has practised the arts alleged against him, and endeavoured to excite the people to treasonable acts, he has exceeded his instructions. In that case, let him be brought to justice. Overt acts of treason have been committed, and Mr. Oliver, an aavowed agent of Ministers, has perpetrated the crime. Either the agent or the principals are guilty. If he be not tried, they ought to be impeached. Impartial justice, and the loudly raised voice of the country, demands it ; and it is the duty of Parliament to see that so reasonable a demand is satisfied.

...

EXAMINATION AT WAKEFIELD

On Monday, a numerous eeting of the Magistrates of the West-Riding was held in the Sessins Room at the House of Correction, Wakefield, for the purpose of investigating the cases of the persons recently apprehended at Thornhill-Lees, on a charge of treasonable practices; present, the Right Hon. Earl Fitwilliam (Lord-Lieutenant), in the Chair; Sir Francis Linley Wood, Bart. Rev. Wm. Wood, Clerk, J. P. Heywood, Benj. Dealtry, Godfrey Higgins, Hugh Parker, Michael Stocks, Thomas Horton, Thomas Benyon, and Wm. Bairstow, Esqrs. Wm. Prest, Esq. Mayor of Leeds, was also present. The numerous attendance of the Magistracy on this occasion, was, we have reason to believe, produced by the exposure in our last publication of the diabolical and treasonablie machinations of Oliver, the Government Spy. The examination was private — a circmustance which we regret, because it will prevent us from giving that full account of the investigation which we were desirous to present to the country, and which wvmid, we are persuaded, have tended essentially to tranquillize the public mind.

After the examination of William Bradley of Sheffield, on whose information the prisoners had been committed, Mr. John Dickinson, of Dewsbury, was called in and examined touchiing the circumstances of Oliver's conduct. This gentleman's examiniation occupied nearly two hours, in the course of which, we understand, he confirmed, upon oath, the circumstances detailed in the Second Edition of our last Paper, and Earl Fitzwilliam, the Lord-Lieutenant, took down the evidence with great minuteness.

Mr. James Willan, the bookseller, was next called, and expressed his readiness to state his evidence, relative to the attempts made by Oliver to seduce him from his allegiance, on his solemn affirmation, but this being a criminal car5, the affirmation of a Quaker is not admissible, an he was obliged to withdraw without giviing his evidence.

The exnmination of the witnesses continued several hours, and the Magistrates, after deliberating some time on the evidence, directed that

Thmas Murray, of Leeds, Michael Walker of Robert-Town, Miles Illingworth of Manningham,  Edward Fletcher of High-Town, Joseph Midgley of Almondbury, & William Walker of Thornhill should be discharged on their own recognizances.

Thomas Wood, of Westgate-Common, Wakefield, was also discharged, on finding bail, himself in £40, and two sureties in £20 each.

Benjamim Wihitley, of Holmfirth, was remanded until Friday, when he was told that he would be discharged on the same terms as Thomas Wood, if no  further charge was preferred against him.

And John Smaller, of Horbury, and James Mann, of Leeds, were then brought up and discharged; but were immediately taken into custody by a King's Messenger, under a warrant signed by Lord Sidmouth, and were sent off the same evening in a post chaise to London, accompanied for a short distance by a small escort of cavalry. The warrant for the apprehension of these unfortunate men is, we understand, founded on the information of the informer Oliver.

It is impossible to describe the general satisfaction which the invsetigation of this day produced. The discharge of the state prisoners was justly considered as a disavowal on the part of the highly respectable magistracy assembled, of any serious plot against the Government of the country, and the impression made upon the mind of the Lord Lieutenant will, we hope, have a salutary influence in another place.

TO THE EDITOR of the LEEDS MERCURY.

Sir— The insertion of the following in your paper will much oblige, Your obedient Servant, JOHN DICKINSON.

TO Mr. GRIFFITH WRIGHT.  
SIR— My astonishment would have been greatly excited by the article in your paper of the 16th inst. but coming from the quarter it does, it only serves to confirm my opinion both of the Editor and the paper.

If you would permit truth to appear, it would never have been stated, that on my being closely questioned it came out that my name waas Dickinson. as I introduced myself by name nearly in the first moment of our inttrview, and had never the least idea of concealing it ; as to the promise of calling again, it was only conditiotnal, viz, if my friends in Leeds should approve of my taking the responsibility upon myself.

This is my statement, and the public will decide between us ; and as my only wish was to develope the truth, I could not, neither did I expect any thing like a candour in the conduct of one always ready to support the worst measures which can be adopted for this countrv, and to abuse all who will not tamely bow their necks to the yoke of despotism.

Mr Spedding, the Constable of Dewsbury, has readily signed his name to the following:

'I hereby certify that John Dickinson. of Dewsbury, had full authority from me to use my name in the advertising of Oliver in the Leeds Intelligencer of the 16th of June, 1817.

'THOMAS SPEDDING, Constable of Dewsbury.'

SUMMER CIRCUITS.

*Home*.— Lord Ellenborough and Mr. Justice Dallas.
*Norfolk.*— Lord C. Jus. Gibbs, & Mr. Justice Abbott.
*Northern*.—  Lord Ch. Baron Richards & Baron Wood.
*Western.*— Mr. Baron Graham, & Mr. Jus. Burroughs.
*Midland.*— Mr. Justice Bailey , & Mr. Jus. Holrod.
*Oxford.*— Mr. Justice Park, and Mr. Baron Garrow.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18170621/010/0004#
Leeds Mercury
Saturday 21 June 1817

p4
REPORT of the COMMITTEE of SECRECY.

*Further Suspensions of the Habeas Corpus Act.*

In the House of Lords, on Thursday the 12th inst. the *Earl of Harrowby* presented a Report from the Committee of Secrecy, which was read by the Reading Clerk at the table. The Report began by stating, that the Committee had taken into their serious consideration the papers referred to in the Prince Regent's Message, and they felt it their duty to state, that it appeared from the evidence before them, that the practices, meetings, and combinations, alluded to in their former Report, still continued in various parts of the country, having for their object the overthrow of the Constitution and Government, and the destruction of the established system of order and tranquillity. The evidence upon which they founded their opinion, was in part derived from persons implicated in these transactions, and from individuals who had participated in them, with the view of making communications on the subject to the Magistrates or to the Secretary of State. With respect to these latter persons, the Committee thought it right to state that in some instances they had urged on other individuals to acts of violence, instead of merely watching what these individuals did. Making, however, every allowance for the exaggerations which had thus risen, the Committee had evidence before them, of the accuracy of which there was no doubt, that disaffection to a considerable extent prevailed in the manufacturing districts in the northern parts of the kingdom. It was undoubtedly true, that in some of these districts there existed considerable distress; but it was equally true, that the distress of which actually existed must be considered the instrument rather than the cause of disaffection, it being the fact, that in many places were the pressure was most grievous, the people evinced the greatest loyalty, patience, and good order. -The Committee had found since the last Report, the practices at Manchester had been continued, and that a meeting was summoned to be held there on the 3d of March, which was numerously attended, and at which the most inflammatory language was used. It was proposed and agreed to at this meeting, to hold another meeting on to the 10th of March, and it was recommended that ten out of every twenty assembled on the latter day, should be in readiness to proceed to London, for the pretended purpose of presenting a petition to the Prince Regent, with which view they were to provide themselves with blankets, shoes, &c. The meeting was held, and attended by from 10 to 12.000 persons, notwithstanding several of the ringleaders had been previously arrested, and the project of proceeding to London was attempted to be carried into effect, but the deluded individuals were stopped through the activity of the Magistrates at different short distances, and compelled to retrace their steps. It appeared it was held oat to them that they would be joined on the road by large bodies from different towns, so that by the time they advanced towsards London they would be 100,000. The grossest delusions were, in fact, held out to persons assembled upon that occasion, nor could the project itself be considered in any other light than as directed against the public tranquillity, which must necessarily have been considerably endangered by the attempt of a considerable body of men to advance in the manner proposed to London.— After this period, it appeared that the additional power entrusted to the Government had some effect, and that numerous meetings were not attempted to be held, but secret meetings were assembled in remote places; and though some societies were broken up, and some public houses would not receive them, they contrived to assemble in other houses in a lonely situation. At some of these meetings the most undisguised language was used; it was no longer Parliamentary Reform that was held up as a pretext, but Revolutibn was openly advocated; the individuals attempted to be influenced were called upon to provide arms (though the committee had been unable to trace any arrangement made for the actual procuring of arms), and it was even held out that persons in office, and others obnoxious to them, ought to be got rid of. A general rising was contemplated early in April, but from some circumstances it was put off till June. In the mean time, numerous meetings, in consequence of the additional power placed in the hands of Government, not being deemed advisable, a system of delegation was established, and persons calling themselves delegates assembled at different places. It was held out, that it would not be advisable to commit much to writing, and that the names of the leaders should be as much as possible concealed. These persons calling themselves delegates, repeatedly assembled, and kept up an extensive correspondence. An assembly of these delegates was held at a town in Yorkshire, early in May, at which it was determined that a general rising should take phice on the 10th of June. Nottingham was to be the head quarters of the insurgents. They were to obtain arms by plundering the barracks and other depots, and to march in a large body to London. It appeared that the conspirators had even gone the length of contemplating the destruction of Manchester, for the purpose of adding to the discontent, by throwing a great number of persons out of employ. The signal was to be given by a rocket being fired; upon which the manufactories and other buildings were to be destroyed. The project was frustrated by the activity of thle Magistrates, and it appeared that the project of the general uprising had also been frustrated; but there were some districts in which the parties had determined on rising, notwithstanding the determination of this meeting of delegates; and the evidence before the Committee upon this subject had been confirmed by the recent appearance of bodies of men in arms at a the precise period which is stated to have been fixed upon, an particularly in one of the districts, which had latterly been represented as determined to act without waiting for a general insurrection. The Committee, in taking this view of certain parts of the country, which was unfortunately too well supported by the evidence and documents before them, felt it their duty to state, that in other quarters there was a general feeling of loyalty and attachment to the Government ; and that, even in the disturbed districts, the greater part of the people were loyally attached to the Governmnent. The Magistrates had displayed the greatest activity in frustrating the projects of the disaffected, and they were powerfully aided by the loyal support of the population. The Magistrates, however, were of opinion, that the most effectual means of putting down the disaffected, and frustrating their projects, had risen out of the additional powers placed in the hands of Government: and the Committee were of opinion, upon the whole view of the case, that, in order to trustrate effectually the projects of disaffection, it was absolutely necessary to continue the additional powers vested in the hands of Government, the ordinary laws being insufficient for the purpose.— The Report was laid on the table, and ordered to be printed.

ALSO: article on YEOMANRY CAVALRY givening notice to residents of Leeds that such a domestic force will be raised.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18170705/008/0003
Leeds Mercury

Saturday 05 July 1817
p3

OLIVER THE SPY.-

A fact has come to our knowledge connected with the the mission of this arch traitor, which, though it can be communicated in a few words, speaks volumes to the mind of every British subject. On the first arrival of Mr. Oliver in the neighbourhood of *Sheffield*, where he spread terror among the peaceable and well-disposed part of the inhabitants, and by his flattering representations imparted joy and confidence to the disaffected and evil-minded, the vigilance of the magistrates at that place enabled them to trace out his proceedings, and to discover that he was disemminating the poison of his treasons in every direction. The first use made by the magistrates of this discovery was to apprise the conservators of the public peace in other parts of the riding of the arrival of this incendiary, and their next step was to address a letter to the Secretary of State for the home department informing him that a *London Deleqate*, a man apparently above the lower ranks, had arrived in the country, and was actively employed in organizing sedition and exciting the people to acts of treason. This letter was written by Hugh Parker, Esq. the senior magistrate of the district, who, by return af post, received an answer from Lord Sidmouth, informing him that the person he described as so dangerous a character was an *Agent of Govermment !!!* Indignant at this communication, Mr. Parker's first determination was to withdraw his name from the comnmission of the peace, but his repugnaance to shrink from his duty at time of public exigency overcame his detestation of the system which ministers had adopted, and he was prevailed upon to continue those services which have reflected so much honour on his own character, and so much benefit on the country. When Lord Sidmouth's *long promised* statement regarding the employment given by government to a herd of spies and informers makes its appearance, we hope he will indulge the public with the correspondence which passed between his lordship and the Sheffield magistracy. We should be glad too if the Magistrates would publish the examinations taken before the Lord-Lieutenant at Wakefield, on Monday, the 16th. ult. If we are rightly informed, those examinations confirm every material point of the statement regarding Mr. Oliver, made in this paper two days before; and it has been stated distinctly in the House of Commons, that the *only material called for the crown* on that occasion, swore that Mr. Oliver got up, or prepared the whole plot. We beg to direct the attentiosn of our readers to the speech of Mr Bennett on the third reading of the Habeas Corpus Suspension Act, and we should be glad if some Member of the House would move, in his place, for the production of Bradley's evidence.

On this subject Lord Castlereagh has dauntlessly declared that government do employ spies, and has represented them as necessary to the safety of the state. Under an administration such as that formed by his lordship and his co-adjutors this may be the case, but *good* ministers, like *good* princes, require no spies, and the words of Montesquieu, whose skill in the science of politics would not suffer by a comparison with any of the present ministers individually, or with the whole of them collectively, has said:— " Should I be asked whether there is any necessity for spies in monarchies, my answer would be, that the usual practice of good princes is not to employ them. The trade of a spy might perhaps be tolerable were it practised by honest men, but the *necessary* infamy of the person is sufficient to make us judge of the infamy of the thing."

It has been insinuated, that in making the exposure we have exhibited to the public, we have been influenced by factious motives, and that our object has been merely to annoy the servants of the Crown, and to advance the interests of a party. Supposing this to be the case, the motives would not disprove the facts. But we claim the merit of higher influence. That we have our party predilections we are free to confess, but we have much more regard for our country than for our party. It has been stated that we are ultra-reformers, or as the phrase in the *Sun** Newspaper is " reformers of the modern school." This assertion we deny, and we appeal to facts for the veracity of our disclaimer. It is known by every man who has read our sentiments on Parliamentary Reform, as published in this paper, that without presuming to condemn the advocates of universal suffrage and annual parliaments, we have never been the supporter of those measures. It is known too, that at the meeting held in this town for the purpose of voting a Petition to the Legislature on the subject of Parliamentary Reform, we stedfastly and successfully opposed the introduction of a motion for assembling adjourned meetings, maintaining that they had the appearatice of holding out a menace to government. It is also known, that when the practice prevailed last year of sending out political missionaries, for the purpose of inculcating the principles of Parliamentary Reform, we openly and perseveringly condemned the policy, and exposed the impropriety of such a proceeding, and it was probably owing to this cause that we never had the honour of a call from MR. OLIVER. It is further known, that we supported to the best of our power the benevolent views of those who, during the past year of general distress, exerted themselves to relieve the labouring classes by providing them food at a reasonable price; and that we pointedly condemned the censure cast upon institutions established for that purpose; but it, is not known, perhaps, though it is nevertheless true,that we never were connected at any time with any political society whatever. In making these statements, we must repeat that we are not to be understood as conveying any censure towards. those who have pursued a different course on any or all the points we have mentioned ; we merely state the facts to show that we are neither ultra-reformirs nor the slaves of any party. On every subject we act on the decision of our own unbiased opinion, honestly formed, and we claim therefore the credit of having made the exposure of MR. OLIVER, and the spy system, purely on public and patriotic grounds.

We have the satisfaction to conclude this article, by staing a fact, that will be haied with pleasure by every real friend to social order: Since Mr. Oliver left Yorkshire, perfect tranquiility has been restored. The County was never more peaceable. The 13th light dragoons, who had been brought into the West Riding, under an apprehension of an insurrectiorary rising, have returned to their quarters at York, and the nightly military patrole has been discontinued. In a word, we are as tranquil now the spies have disappeared, as we were before they came amongst us. The exciting cause has been withdrawn, and the effect has ceased.

See also: https://thespyoliver.blogspot.com/2017/07/5th-july-1817-oliver-spy-in-leeds.html

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18170712/008/0003
Leeds Mercury
Saturday 12 July 1817
p3

ORIGIN OF THE LATE CONSPIRACIES.

Several attempts have been made, both in and out of Parliament, to prove that Mr Oliver was merely a *passive* agent in the late conspiracies, formed against Government in the North of England; and that he neither excited the popular discontent, nor gave vitality and organization to the conspiracies. — That this representation of the conduct of the "ministerial agent" is false and deceptive, we have already proved by a host of witnesses. But it is said that these witnesses have all acted under the influence of a disposition to traduce the character of Mr. Legh Keck's *immaculate builder*, and that therefore their evidence is not to be relied upon. This conclusion, we think, does not arise by any means out of the premises. There may, however, be those who are of a different opinion, and to such we beg leave to shoW, out of the mouth of a *Government witness*, that Mr. Oliver was the "Great Man";— that under his directions the *delegates*, so called, were appointed— that he moved and controlled every thing, and that he was, in a word, "the foreman of the concern."

At the examination held at Wakefield on Monday, the 16th of June, before the Lord-Lieutenant, and a full bench of Magistrates, to inquire into the conduct of the ten prisaners apprehended at Thornhill-Lees on Friday, the 6th ult. on a charge of holdling a treasonable meeting, a witness, whose name we are not at liberty to mention, was produced for the Crown, and against the prisoners. This witness, who was represented by the accusers to be of unimpeached character, and free from all suspicion, deposed, amongst other matters:—

"That he had seen Oliver twice. That he, Oliver, was considered by all the parties as the *great man* to communicate and direct things from London. That as *he* directed so *they* acted. That the appointment of the delegates was subject to Mr. Oliver's approval, and that on one occasion he objected to a delegate alleging that he was an improper person, because he thought he would tell tales. Mitchrll preceded Oliver and introduced him. This deponent was a delegate himself, and was appointod by a person *who received his instructions from Mr. Oliver*. He believes all the delegites were appointed as he was. The deponent stated, that ten men met at Thornhill Lees ; Mr. Oliver was in the lane near the house. He knows that the delegates must have heen approved by Oliver ; he knows it for a certainty, because Oliver did actually reject one of them. The witness *considered Oliver to be the fotreman of the concern*. This witness, who had turned an informer, was taken to Thornhill Lees to identify the delegates, and it was at his suggestion that Oliver was seized, but he, (Oliver), was almost immediately afterwards set at liberty by a person in authority, who said— "he must be liberated, he is the Governmmnt spy, or agent, or words to that effect."

For the accuracy of this portion of the evidence, we appeal to the Magistrates present at the examination, and we beg again to press upon their consideration the propriety of laying the whole of the depositions taken on that occasion before the public. If our frequent calls for the details of the proccedings at Wakefield, on the 16th inst. and for the loeng-promised statement of Lord Sidmouth in justification of the system of *espionage*, has the appearance of pertinacity, we have no other apology to offer for our perseverance than that which arises out of a deep anxiety for the establishment of truth, and a sincere wish to rescue our countrymen from the stigma which has been cast upon their character, it order to find a pretence for suspending their liberties.

[--break--]

On Wednestday se'nniight, two persons, who we understand were a king's messenger and a Bow-street officer, arrived at Wakefield, and arrested Benjamin Scholes, by virtue of a warrant from the Secretary of State, and immediately took him away for London. They starched his house and examined his papers, but did not carry one away with them. This was all done with such secrecy, that the fact was not known beyond the circuit of his family till Friday noon. — *Wakefiled Star*

*Charges of Treasonable Practices.*— On Thursday night, a man of the name of Scholes, was brought to London by a King's Messenger and a Bow-street officer, from Wakefield. On Friday Scholes underwent an examination at the Secretary of State's Office for the Home Department, before Lord Sidmouth, the Law Officers, Sir N. Conant, &c. At the same time several others, who had been in custody for some time, were brought from the House of Correction, and underwent an examination. After which Scholes was sent off to Cambridge prison.— On Saturday night, betwveen nine and ten o clock, a King's Messenger and a Bow-Street Officer arrived in town with another man in custody, on a charge of Treasonable Practices, by virtue of a warrant issued against him, signed by Lord Viscomnt Sidmouth, as Secretary of State. On account of the lateness of the hour, no person was in attendance at the Secretary of State's Office, and no Magistrate being sitting, he was lodged in the House of Correction.

William Wheatley, who was brought to London on Saturday night, was on Monday removed from the House of Correction to the Secretary of State's Office for the Home Department, where he underwent an examination before Lord Viscount Sidmouth, the Law Officers, Sir N. Conant, &c. He was afterwards remanded. The Messenger and Officer brought him from Huddersfield, in Yorkshire.

*Oliver the Spy.*— This fellow, whom no invitation seemns likely to drag from his hiding place, is said to be a native of Wales, and a carpenter by trade. He was last summer a prisoner in the Fleet, where he would have been starved, had it not been tbr some friends to reform— of whom he pretended to be one of the most zealous. He is also a freemason, (but we hope, will not long remain so,) and secretary to the Royal Public Lodge. No. 100, held at Mr. Murphey's, the Golden Hind, little Moorfields. He is a tall good-looking man, near six feet in height, and inclined to be corpulent. He was a few years ago a serjeant in the grenadier company of the Whitechapel volunteers.— *Liverpool Mercury*.

...

Since our last, were committed to York Castle, ... - Also, Thomas Riley, of Crosland Moor tailor, charged upon the oath of one credible witness, with beinig aceessary before the fact, and procuring, counselling, commanding, or abetting others to bring about and commit certain riots, unlawful assemblies, and felonies, at the parishes of Kirkburton, Almondbury and Huddersfield, or one of them, and which riots, unlawful assemblies, and felonies, took place on the night of the 8th of June last.-Also, Benjamin Green, of Honley, cloth dresser, charged upon the oath of Joshua Kemp, with being present and aiding and assisting in a riot and unlawful assembly, at the township of Honley on Saturday, the 8th of June last, asd tumultuously going about, and unlawfully and feloniosly demanding, stealing, taking and carrying away certain fire arms, from the dwelling-houses of Sarah Jessop and others, in Honley aforesaid. Also, Joseph Jysop, of Lockwood, cloth-dresser, charged upon the oath of Charles Earnsbaw, with being present and aiding and assisting in a riot and unlawful assembly, and bearing arms, at a place called Folly Hall Bridge, in Huddersfield on the night of Sunday the 8th June last, to the terror of the people, and along with others unknown, and with intent to have done some of his Majesty's liege subjects some grievous bodily harm.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18170719/010/0003
Leeds Mercury

Saturday 19 July 1817
p3

THE HUDDERSFIELD INSURRECTION

An inflated and highly exaggerated account of the state of the town and neighbourhood of Huddersfield, during the past month, has been published in the Leeds Intelligencer, and copied into the London Ministerial papers. Such a publication, on the eve of the trial at York, we hold to be extremely reprehensible, and must, as far as it is believed, have a tendency to prejudice the minds of the jury appointed to sit in judgement upon the lives of the accused. To assert in a public print before the trials come on, and of coorse on *ex parte* evidence, that the object of the prisoners was " massacre," and that their plans were to be consummated by " plunder, fire, and carnage, to a fearful extent," is to prejudge their cause, and to deprive these untortunate men of the benefit of that salutary maxim of the English law, which holds every man to be innocent till a jury of his countrymen has pronounced him guilty. Without pretenting to be at all in the secrets of the insurgents, we must say, we have too favourable an opinion of our species and of our countrymen, to believe that any numerous body of themn in a particular neighbourhood, could be brought to be the actors in a sedition, that was to inflict " massacre, plunder, fire, and carnage," upon their neighbours, " to a fearful extent." The intention of the insurgents, as far as we can learn, was to effect a " bloodless revolution," and the purpose of seizing and *disarming* the military, as stated is the accoun before us, seems to favour that supposition. That a bloodliess revolution could have been effected, is, to be sure, a supposition too gross to be entertained by any set of men of common understanding ; but Mr. Oliver, it seems, had the address to persuade the leaders that a project of this kind was practicable, and his dupes were so utterly ignorant as to adopt the absurdity. This fact may serve to shew of what kind of materials the Huddersfield branch of the conspiracy was formed. How many men and boys (for there was, it seems, a considerable proportion of the latter) assembled at *Folly*-hall-bridge, near Huddersfield, on the night of the 8th, we cannot learn with any degree of certainty, but some estimate may be formed of their strength from the fact, that a detachment of newly-raised Yeomanry Cavalry put to flight and entirely dispersed the insurgent army ! while the only blood that flowed on the occasion on either side, was the blood of a horse, and the only other mark of violence inflicted was, as the Intelligencer states, the mark of a bail which struck a deserted house ! We do not wish to speak with levity of a proceeding which every friend to his country must condemn, but when we see a local act of popular violence, exaggerated to the bulk of a wide spreading insurrection, we feel it to be our duty to remove the deception, by lowering down the colouring to the standard of truth.

We have hitherto cautiously abstained from entering into the details of the violent proceedings in the neighbourhood of Huddersfield on the night of the 8th of June, satifying ourselves with stating from time to time the committals of the prisoners to the County gaol ; and this course we should have pursued, leaving the facts to be developed upon the trials, had not the exaggerated statements made in the Intelligencer induced us to depart from that determination. It now, however, becomes proper to state, that ever since the year 1812, when the Luddite system prevailed in Yorkshire, and raged more especially in the South-western plots of this Riding, there has been considerable irritation existing in the minds of some of the lower classes in the neighbourhood of Huddersfield. This disposition, the extreme distress suffered by the labouring part of the community during the past year, tended materially to increase. For a time, the hope of Parliamentary Reform allayed the public dissatisfaction, by affording some prospect of relief, and petitions for that purpose wvere drawn up and signed very generally; but no sooner was the Bill for the suspension of the *Habeas Corpus* Act passed into a law, then hope gave place to despair; and soon after, a number of designing men, seizing the opportunity, did not hesitate to inculcate the opinion, that nothing short of a revolution could terminate the general suffering. Of these pestilent characters, the notorious Mr. Oliver was one of the principal ; and we have the authority of the wife of one of the persons mentioned in the Intelligencer as a principal conspirator (George Dawson), delivered in the presence of three respectabie witnesses, for saying that as long since as nearly two months ago, Oliver was in communication with the ring-leaders of the sedition, and that on one occasion he was a visitor at Dawson's house. On the same authority we state, that Mr. Oliver had held conferences with George Taylor, the leader of the mal-content forces, on the night of the 8th of June, and it is known that both Dawson and Taylor have since absconded. How Oliver conducted himself in his visits to Huddersfield, may be collected from the testimony of Dawson's wife, who says, that one morning, while she was at breakfast at Dawson's house, Oliver, among other inflammatory conversation, said -" They are all in readiness, in London. There is no occasion for bloodshed. We have only to seize the military and disarm them, and the thing is done." He added, that he had been concerned with Despard ;  that just before the Colonel and his associates were apprehended, he was going into a private room with them, but recollecting that he had a little business of his own to transact, he stepped out. and had not been gone half an hour, before they were all taken.

Under this kind of excitation, it is no wonder that the persons to whom such conversation was addressed, began to form traitorous designs, or rather perhaps, to cherish hopes that designs already formed might be realized. The leaders, it appears, held frequent communications with the subordinate agents. The plot thickened daily. A considerable number of men in the lowest ranks of life became involved in the conspiracy. Sunday night, the 8th of June, was appointed for the rising. Two or three hundred persons, it is said, many of them boys from 14 to 20 years, assembled at a place bearing the appropriate name of *Folly*-hall-bridge. Taylor placed himself at their head, and at 12 o'clock, the moment for commnencing operations, this fanatic addressed his followers in these terms " Now, my lads, all England is in arms-our liberties are secure— the rich will be poor, and the poor will be rich." To this rabble a detachment of six Yeomanry Cavalry was at first opposed, and we verily believe that had the cavalry , small as their number were, thought proper to advance, they would have routed the insurgents, They however judged it prudent to retreat, and being reinforced by a body of their comrades, they returned to witness the dispersion of an unorganized mob that had been drawn together, some by actual force, others by an idle curiosity, and others, no doubt, with criminal designs. In the mean time, a sort of under-plot was acting, and a number of marauders were passing about the neighbourhood, forcing the peaceable inhabitants to open their doors and surrender their fire-arms. At Honley, they broke into the house of Mr. Armitage, who observed that one of the bandits seemed better dressed than his associates, " that he was not like one of this country-men, and that he talked like a londoner." 

The Magistrates, who appear to have displayed a more than ordinary share of vigour, soon found means to discover and to arrest a number of the persons engaged in these criminal excesses, and twenty-four of them have been committed to York Castle, to take their trials at the Assizes, which commence this day, while about half that number still remain in confinement in the prison at Huddersfield. It is much to be regretted that the persons apprehended, and about to be put upon their trials, have for the most part, been, at most, merely the dupes of thse leaders of this miserable conspiracy, atid that the instigators, including Mr. Oliver, the London delegate, have been suffered to escape.

*Mr. Oliver's Cyper.*—  It appears from the evidence of the principal witness for the Crown given before the Lord Lieutenant and the Magistrates at Wakefield, on Monday, the 16th of June, that Mr. Oliver corresponded with his dupes in cypher, and that one of the mottos used by him for that purpose was—  *"The Old Mother is sick, and expects all her sons to arm."*

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18170719/006/0002

Leeds Mercury

Saturday 19 July 1817
p2

MINISTERIAL JUSTIFICATION OF OLIVER

*(From the Times)*

In the House of Commons on Friday, in a debate on the State of the Nation, Mr. H Addington said, he had risen principally with a view of doing justice to a much injured individual—he meant Mr. Oliver. (*hear, hear*.) Within this fortnight two magistrates within the county of York, who had received an unfavourabie impression as to the conduct of Mr. Oliver in the country, had requested that he might undergo an examination at the office for the Home Department. One of these magistrates came from Yorkshire on purpose. and the other was a much respected member of that House, whose absence he regretted, as that gentleman would have corroborated the statement he had to make. These magistrates took the examination ; the individual who brought the charge was confronted with Mr. Oliver, and the result was, that both magistrates declared themselves competely satisfied that the charge was false. that there was not indeed the smallest foundation for supposing that he had provoked the insurrection in the country; and that there had been nothing blameable either in the language or conduct of the person thus accused. It was his duty to make this statement, because the facts could only be made known to the house through hiim. Mr. Oliver had taken no part in any plots. He came to the Home-office in the beginning of April, and offered information which he considered beneficial to the country, but which he had not obtained by being implicated in any conspiracy. He asked no reward, and never received a shilling from Government, except what served to defray his travelling expenses. Informaion had been transmitted to the Home-office, that the insurreetion which had been attempted was to break out on the 9th or 10th of June. All the magistrates in the disturbed districts. who had written on the subject, agreed in fixing upon the same date. The duty required of Mr. Oliver was to go to the country to ascertain whether this report was correct, and to transmit to the Home-office what information he mighlt collect. This, it was supposed, would save time to the magistrates and the information, it was thought, would be more speedily collected than by relying solely on the separate communications of the magistrates. He carried letters of recommendation to five or six magistrates, and was ordered to return by the 5th of June, as by that time it was necessary that the Executive Govermnent should be prepared with the precautions against the imminent danger which threatened the peace of the country. Mr. Oliver, however, stayed by accident a day or two beyond the limited time; and he had himself written a letter to hasten his return. When Mr. Oliver came to the office and offered to give evidence, he declared he did so in the hope of saving the country; and he was fully persuaded of his sincerity.

*Mr. Barham* doubted much whether the country, or even that House, would concur in the judgement of acquittal which the secret tribunal to which the Right Hon. Gent. referred had pronounced on the spy Oliver. Those who had not the advantage of having been present at the secret tribunal, must decide on the facts already within their knowledge. For his part, he should declare that his judgment could not be on the favourable side, when he recollected what he had heard from a departed Right Honourable friend of his, whose memory had been so justly eulogized that night. Mr. Ponsonby (who it will be recollected was a member of the Secret Committee) had told him, that he believed, in his conscience, the insurrection would not have taken place had it not been for Oliver. He had been so struck with this observation, that he asked his Right Hon. Friend to repeat what he had stated, and he did repeat it.

*Frame-breaking*.-The *Gazette* of Tuesday night contains the Proclamation of the Prince Regent, offering an amnesty to the persons concerned in the offence of frame-breaking, except in the case of the outrage at Loughborough; the intention of issuing which was announced by Lord Sidmouth on the discussion of the Frame-breaking Bill in the House of Lords. After alluding to the increase of punishment annexed to this offence by the Act recently passed, and expressing a hope that persons will thus be deterred from the future colmmission of such offences, the Proclamation proceeds—

" We do hereby promise and declare, that every person who hath committed any offence against the form of the Statute made in the fifty-fourth year of his Majesty's reign, for the punisirnuent of persons destroying stocking or lace-frames, but hath not yet been charge therewith, and who shall, previous to the firsi day of September next ensuing, appear before some Justice of the Peace or Magistrate and declare such his offence, and when, where, and by whom the same was committed, shall receive his Majesty's most gracious pardon for such offence, and that no confession so made by any such person shall be given in evidence in any Court, or in any case whatever; provided nevertheless, that nothing herein contained shall extend to the offence so committed at Loughborough as afore said, nor to any other offence, except such as may hav been committed contrary to the said Statute made in the fifty-fourth year aforesaid."

[TH: so what had distinguished the case of the Loughborough frame breakers? https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2017/07/31st-july-1817-samuel-caldwell.html http://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2017/03/31st-march-1817-trial-of-luddite-john.html#more https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2017/04/james-hobson-last-luddite-executions.html ]


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18170726/012/0003
Leeds Mercury - Saturday 26 July 1817

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18170809/007/0003
Leeds Mercury - Saturday 09 August 1817

THE PROSECUTION OF THE HUDDERSFIELD RIOTERS AND THEIR WITNESSES

IN another part of our 1mblication of this day, will be found a letter from MR. R. HAIGH ALLEN, Esq. one of the Huddersfield Magistrates, denying, in positive terms, that any conversation of the nature referred to in CHARLES HEARNSHAW's Declaration, inserted in our last week's paper, took place in his presence. This disclaimer of  Mr. ALLEN is followed by a letter from Mr. THOMAS ATKINSON, in which he asserts that he asked no *favour* of CHARLES HEARNSHAW as stated in his Declaration, but admits that he had a conversation with him in the anti-room, previous to the examination of Hearnshaw before the Grand Jury, and that he combated the evidence which Hearnshaw stated that it was his intention to give, respecting the first fire at Folly-hall- Bridge, on the night of the 8th of June, and endeavoured to influence his mind contrary to the witscss's avowed impressions of the facts to which he was about to swear. Mr. Atkinson adds, that he did indeed give Armitage and Hearnshaw a shilling's worth of oranges, because they had been so long detained from their dinner,—but that this " bribe," as Mr. Atkinson calls it, was given in the most public manner.

Upon the appearance of these counter-statements, we felt it to be our duty to write to a tradesman in Huddersfield, requesting that he would see Hearnshaw, the declarant, and inquire into the truth of his Declaration; adding, that if he had, either from design or inadvertency, stated any thing that was false, to the disadvantage of Mr. Allen or Mr. Atkinson, or any of the other persons mentioned in his publication, it was as much his duty to make a public retraction of those statements, (if erroneous) as it was to persist in them if true. In reply to this letter, Hearnshaw himself came over to Leeds, and waited upon the Printer of this Paper, when he re-asserted, in the presence of a gentleman of the town, all the facts he had stated in his Declaration, and added, that he was ready to verify them, upon oath, before any Magistrate in the kingdom.

It is no part of our duty to reconcile the conflicting testimony of Mr. Allen and Mr. Thomas Atkinson with that of Charles Hearnshaw. They are, indeed, irreconcileable. It is assertion against assertion. We have merely inserted the papers as they have reached us, without feeling either responsibility or anxiety about the truth of any of them. The conflict, it will be observed, is between the parties in the prosecution and one of their principal witnesses, and it is impossible to imagine any thing that could be more gratifying to the feelings of the State prisoners, so lately acquitted or discharged, for want of evidence to put them upon their trial, than to find the committing Magistrate and one of the witnesses, on whose testimony they were committed to York Castle, impeaching each other's veracity. The prosecutors, in these State trials, are, to be sure, placed in a most curionu predicmnnent, with respect to their witnesses —those they did produce the Court would not believe, and those they did not produce they will not believe themselves !

There is, however, one part of Hearnshaw's evidence, and that the most nateri:m part of it, which stands uncontradicted, and which, we understand, is unquestionable, namely, that he was examined before the Grand Jury, and that, because his testimony did not square with the wishes of the prosecutors for conviction, he was not produced on the trial, though as the learned Judge observed, " it was the duty of the prosecutors, and due to the justice of the case, to have brought forward this witness." BARON WOOD added, that the Jury would draw their own inferences from this strong fact.

The characteristic feature of these prosecutions was *suppression*. In the first place, the depositions of the witnesses, taken by the committing magistrates, were withheld, contrary to the usual practice, till the Judge made particular inquiries for them :— in the second, the evidlence of a principal witness was suppressed, though he had been kept a month in confinement in order to be prepared to give that evidence :— and, in the third and last place, if we are rightly informed. the depositions taken before the Magistrates at Wakefield, during their inquiry into this business, on the 9th of June, though containing, we have reason to believe, important matter to the prisoners, was also suppressed. In the emphatic words of BARON WOOD, the public " will draw their own inferences" from these "strong facts."

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000365/18170809/003/0002
Carlisle Patriot - Saturday 09 August 1817

---
