# Luddite Tales, Retold

As is still the case today, every so often local newspapers would take a historical look back at the news of the past. Such reviews can provide us with a sense of how the original events might have been recalled in folk memory a lifetime or two later.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000336/18670511/020/0006?browse=true
Leeds Times - Saturday 11 May 1867
p6

AN OLD STORY RETOLD — THE LUDDITES

The Luddite rioters of Nottinghamshire and Yorkshire derive their name from General Lud, their mythical leader, that awe-striking name and title being, however,borne by several of their chiefs at different times and in different districts. The deplorable outrages committed by these men—the breaking into houses to seize fire-arms and obtain money for the purposes of their mischievous and dangerous association—lasted for nearly forty years, during which time, with the exception of a few lulls, the great manufacturing districts were in as disturbed and lawless a state as the Border country when such mauraders as Hard-Riding Dick and William of Deloraine drove honest men’s cattle, burned keep-towers, and harried farm-houses. All social diseases have their climax. The night, they say, is darkest just before daybreak. To all miseries and misfortunes there is a culminating period. It was in 1812 that the Luddists were fiercest, maddest, and most desperate, deriding all Philosophy and forgetting all the tenets of political economy in the fierceness of their indignation. Their object was to destroy the new frames which about the end of the last century were introduced (" with, power") to finish woollen goods. Up to this time, cloth had been finished by a tedious and costly process, a man being required to each machine, and three times the  expense being incurred. The machine was a ponderous unsightly instrument, square at the extremity of the blade, but otherwise not unlike the shears used by sheep-shearers, One blade was passed under the balk cloth to be finished, and the other over it, the latter cropping off the nap of the wool as the blades were dexterously pushed, backwards and forwards by the workmen. The men  engaged in this primitive ocoupation were known by the name of Croppers. The process was as much behind the age as the Hottentot system of spinning is behind the latest processes of Manchester. The croppers, whose occupation was thus interfered with, became as violent as the silversmiths of Ephesus, and were the chief leaders in the Luddite riots. They were generally of the stubborn resolute Yorkshire race; ignorant, violent, determined, holding together for good or ill, and resolved to destroy the new frames, which they believed would throw poor men out of work and starve their families.

There is a wild old Yorkshire legend extant, which pretty well proves the opinion entertained of the croppers by their contemporaries. We give it in the words of amost reliable authority : "The tradition is, that in consequence of their dissipated and wicked ways, all the croppers at their departure hence went to a certain place, that—to describe it negatively—was neither purgatory nor paradise, and that in the course of time they became so numerous in that particularly warm region, and withal so very, very unruly, that the devil was at his wits' end what to do with them, and had no pleasure of his existence in their company. Get rid of them he could not. There they were, and, notwithstanding all remonstranoes, declared that they would neither depart nor yet mend their manners. One day, while pondering upon his difficult position, a brilliant idea suddeniy occurred to his Satanic Majesty. He knew the fondness of the croppers when on earth for ale, whether good, bad, or indifferent, so he, went to the door of the infernal regions, and bawled out with all his might, 'Ale! ale! ale!' The effect was magical. At the joyful sound the croppers were instantaneously seized with a burning thirst.  They rushed out to a man helter-skelter to where the delightful news came from. No sooner were they safely out than Satan quietly but quickly slipped in, banging the door to and locking it after him, shouting through the keyhole to the astonished and deluded croppers outside, 'Now, d——n you, I have got you out, aud I'll keep you out, and I'll take good care no more croppers ever come in here!' And this is stated to be the reason that from thenceforth no more croppers entered the infernal regions." No Ribbonmen ever banded together with more sullen determination in their movements; their drilling and their attacks were conducted with military precision. Mere agricultural labourers might have shown as much courage, but could not have formed such subtle combinations. Every man had his allotted place by number (as in a regiment) in the musket, pistol, or hatchet, companies. The form of initiation was known by the local name of " twisting in." The oath taken was as solemn and terrible as that used in the secret tribunals of the middle ages. It was as follows :—" I, ——— ———, of my own voluntary will, do declare and solemnly swear that I never will reveal to any person or persons under the canopy of heaven the names of the persons who compose this secret committee, their proceedings,  meetings, places of abode, dress, features, connexions, or anything else that might lead to a discovery of the same either by word, or deed, or sign, under the penalty of being sent out of the world by the first brother who shall meet me, and my name and character blotted out of existence, and never to be remembered but with contempt and abhorrence ; and I further now do swear, that I will use my best endeavours to punish by death any traitor or traitors, should any rise up amongst us, wherever I can_find him or them ; and though he should fly to the verge of nature, I will pursue him with unceasing vengeance. So help me, God, and bless me to keep this my oath inviolable." At the time of the crisis of disorder in 1812, when the Luddite conspiracy was netting over the greater part of two counties, Enoch and James Taylor constructed the obnoxious frames in their smithy, which stood on what is now the play-ground of the town school at Marsden. These enterprising men had begun life as common blacksmiths, but by industry, perseverance, and inventive genius, had become known as skilful machine makers. The giant hammer used in the Yorkshire smithies was in 1812 playfully known among the grimy artisans who wielded it, as " Enoch," and when the Luddites made one of thair midnight marches to destroy a finishing frame, the cant saying was—alluding to the firm at Marsden and the hammer that was to crush their work,—" Enoch made them, and Enoch shall break them." Suffering, and believing that they would suffer more, these impetuous men totally forgot that al] improvements in a trade tend to enlarge that trade; that all lessenings of cost in the production of a fabric tend to increase the sale of that fabric ; and that if the finishing-machines reduced the number of croppers, the manufacture of them undoubtedly led to the employment of more hammermen. To these truths they were indifferent ; all they knew, was, that the new frames lessened the immediate work for the croppers, and they were determined not merely to destroy those already in use, but to terrify employers from further adopting them. Yet the croppers themselves, as long as they could get work, were well-to-do men, their wages being twenty-four shillings a week. The Marsden people were, indeed, seldom in distress, for the great cotton trade was already developing, and warp and weft ready for the hand-loom were brought from Lancashire fortnightly and put out to Marsden weavers. But let us be just; the times were hard everywhere, and a shilling did not bring then what it had brought before, and what it brings now. Men worked week in and week out, and only just, after all, kept the wolf from the door.  Oh ! there was a sharp biting suffering, before thoughtful working men could combine in that thirty years' conspiracy that brought many brave lads to the gallows, and sent many to pine away the rest of their miserable and wasted lives in the dismal restrictions of New South Wales. Time is full of common sense ; it brings men to the truth; yet for nearly a whole generation it never stopped these disturbances, erroneous as they were. The man who thinks that the troubles indicated no foregone misery and wrong, would call a dying man's groans and screams mere practical jokes.

The Yorkshire nature is staunch and dogged ; it was not going to bear starvation quietly, while proud, arrogant, and often cruel manufacturers were fattening on the cery flesh and blood of the workman and his pining children. The poor man had borne the contemptuous denial of his rights, the incessant suspension of the laws of the land, trade monopolies, tyrannical, stupid, and  heartless governments, civil and religious disabilities, and unjust and useless ways; but dear bread — that was the last straw that broke the camel's back. The artisan saw only in the new machinery means to still further enrich his oppressors and starve himself. When the rich man can be weary of life, is it to be wondered at that the poor man finds life sometimes intolerable? The panacea seemed to be combination. General Lud got recruits in Derbyshire, Lancashire, Cheshire, Nottinghamshire, sndd especially the south-western districts of Yorkshire. There were food riots at Sheffield, Mansfield, and Macclesfield. Food riots are as certain a proof of something wrong in the body politic, as certain pustules are proofs of small-pox. The stocking-weavers in Nottinghamshire began the bad work by holding nocturnal meetings, by forming secret societies, by appointing delegates and local "centres," by extracting black mail from manufacturers, and requiring implicit obedience in their adherents, after administering an oath. From shattering frames, the Yorkshire men began to talk of upsetting the government, Religion was even pressed into the rioters’ service, and a crusading spirit inculcated on those who joined the Luddites. The disorders came to a head in 1812, partly from the lenity shown to Luddite  Prisoners at the Nottingham Assizes in March, and especially by the dreadful price which provisions had then reached. The poor hardly ever tasted nourishing flesh-making wheaten bread ; tea and coffee were almost unknown ; clothing was extravagantly dear ; and the workman had to gain strength for the twelve hours' toil in the bad atmosphere of a mill, from a paltry meal of porridge. All this was hard to bear even with freedom ; but it was intolerable in a country where the intellect and conscience of the nation were enslaved, and where the poor had no other privilege than that of paying am undue share of the taxes levied on them by an enormously wealthy intolerably selfish landed interest. The riots econ overran the West Riding, begining at Marsden. After trying their destructive powers on a small scale there, the frames at Woodbottom and Ottiwells were marked out for destruction, and the lives of their owners, the Armitages apd the Horsfalls, were threatened. These gentlemen tookprompt and energetic measures for the protection of their property. A bridge over the river at the Woodbottom Mill had an iron gate placed across the centre which could be securely fastened against all invaders. It had iron spikes at the top, and a row of iron spikes down each side. This bridge—with its gateway and protecting spikes—remained in its original integrity until a very recent day. "At Ottiwelles," adds a local authority, "at the upper end of the road fronting the mill, and on an elevation, level with the present dam, a cannon was planted behind a wall pierced with openings three feet high and ten inches wide. Through these apertures the cannon could be pointed so as to command the entire frontage of the mill, and fired upon an approaching enemy. This somewhat primitive battery still exists, but the artillery disappeared long ago;  and though now walled up, the outlines of the embrasures formerly left for the cannon to be discharged through, may yet be distinctly discerned, In addition to these means of

*(Concluded in our second page.)*

continues at:

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000336/18670511/021/0002
Leeds Times - Saturday 11 May 1867
p2

defence, the workmen employed at the mills were armec,  and kept watch and ward during the night." Mr. Horsfall, resolute and prompt, was not to be easily frightened, and the Marsden croppers were none of them Luddites. The inhabitants of Marsden and the surrounding villages were also compelled to deliver up all fire-arms in their possession, until the reign of terror should pass away. There were also infantry and cavalry in Marsden. The 10th King's Bays, the 15th Hussars, and the Scotch Greys, were alternately billeted (at quite inadequate rates) in the town, impoverishing and sometimes ruining the landlords, irritating the high-spirited, oppressing the neutral, and contaminating the whole neighbourhood. These regiments were not allowed to remain long in one place, for fear of the men becoming tainted with Luddite opinions. The soldiers marched every night to the market-place at Marsden, and, having been paraded, were then told off into two divisions, the one to patrol on the road to Ottiwells and Valeside, and the other to spend the night between Marsden, Woodbottom Mill, and Lingards. As their movements were well known, and the clash of their swords and the tramp of their horses' feet were to he heard at a long distance at night, it was easy for the Luddites to steal away behind hedges, crouch in plantations, or take by-roads to their work of destruction The cats had belled themselves this time, and the mice could play as they liked. On the 11th of April fire was set to the gunpowder lying above the West Riding. On that day, the croppers at Mr. Wood's mill at Longroyd Bridge, near Huddersfield, were planning a night attack on the mill of a Mr. Cartwright, at Liversedge. The leading conspirator was an impetuous cropper, named George Mellor (twenty-two). His chief lieutenants were Thomas Smith (twenty-three), William Thorpe (twenty-two), and a mean subtle fellow, afterwards an informer, Benjamin Walker (twenty-five). Joshua Dickenson, a cropper, came to the shop on the Saturday before named, and brought a pint of powder, a bag of bullets, and two or three cartridges, to distribute among the Longroyd Mill men. They met at night, about ten o'clock, when it was not quite dark, about three miles from Cartwright's mill, in the fields of Sir George Armitage, at the obelisk (or, as the Luddites quaintly nick-named it, "the dumb steeple"). When more than a hundred men had assembled, Mellor and' Thorpe, the two young leaders, mustered the Luds, and called them over, not by names, but by numbers, in military fashion ; there were three companies—the musket, the pistol, and the hatchet companies ; the rest carried sledge-hammers, adzes, and bludgeons. They were formed in lines two deep, and William Hale (No. 7), a cropper from Longroyd Mill, and a man named Rigge, were ordered by Mellor to go last and drive the Luds up, and see that no coward stole off in the darkness; for there were many Luds who only joined through fear of being assassinated, aud had no heart in the matter. The order to march was at last given, and the band proceeded over wild Hartshead Moor, and from thence into a close sixty yards from Rawfold Mill, where the musket-men put on masks, got ready their fire-arms, and took a draught of rum to cheer them on to the attack. Mellor then formed his company of musketmen into lines of thirteen abreast, and moved on to the doomed mill, followed by Thorpe and his pistol-men. In the meantime, Mr. Cartwright, who had apprehensions of an attack, was in the great stone many-windowed building. The great waterwheels were still; the only sound was the ripple of the water in the mill-dam. The alarm-bell, rising above the roof, stood out dark against the sky. There was no light at any window, and no noise. The five workmen and their allies, the five soldiers, were asleep. The armed men, intent on destruction and ready for murder to their design stole on like ghosts. Soon after twelve, Mr. Cartwright, who had just fallen asleep, was awoke by the violent barking of a large dog kept chained inside the mill for such a purpose. The millowner leaps out of bed to give the alarm, and as he opens his bed-room door he hears twenty or thirty of the three hundred panes of glass on the ground floor shattered in ; at the same time there is a rattle and blaze of musketry at the ground and upper windows ; the bullets whistle, and splinter, and flatten against the inner walls. At the same time a score of sledge-hammers are heard working at the chief door, and voices shouting and threatening at the other entrances, and indeed on all sides, except that on which the mill-pool lies. The hour is come at last. But Mr Cartwright is Yorkshire too, resolute, bold, and of a good heart. He shouts to his men, and they fly to arms, and load and cock their muskets. He and one or two of his workpeople run to the alarm-bell and pull fiercely at the rope, till it clashes out its summons to the Hussars at Liversedge and friends near or far. This drives the Luddites stark staring mad ; the firing becomes hotter ; and a dozen of them cry out, " Fire at the bell-rope ! " " Shoot away the bell! " " D——— that bell! get it, lads ! " (For they knew the soldiers would be on them with their sabres if that bell clang many minutes longer.) Presently the bell-rope breaks, and two mep are sent up to ring and fire alternatively. Cartwright and his men fire from the upper loops of the mill obliquely at the howling crowd that flash off their guns, and ply their hammers, and snap their pistols at the detested mill, where the ten men are glaring at them from under covert. The fire from and against the mill is hot, pelting, and furious. " Bring up Enoch ! " roar stentorian voices. A big hammerman advances to the door, and pounds at it with Enoch as if it were a block of iron. The rest shout, " Bang up, my lads ! " "In with you ! " "Are you in, my lads'?" "Keep close." "In with you, lads!" "D——— them. Kill them, every one!" Mellor then cries, with horrible imprecations, "The door is opened!" But it is not. They are wrong this time. Enoch has been hard and heavy at it; it is true, the panels are broken, so that a man's head might go through, but the lock and bolt are not burst yet. The planks are split with hatchets, the malls have broken and chopped it into holes, but the door still keeps faithful and fast. The stone jambs of one entrance are wrenched out, the frameworks are smashed in ; still Cartwright and his men keep up their fire from between theflagstones that barricade the upper windows, and some of the Luddites are struck. There is a cry that some one is shot, and a man has fallen on his face. Booth is down, and there is hot blood on Dean's hands. Dean has been shot through the door as he plied his hatchet. There are only nine panes of glass left in the ground floor ; but Enoch has failed this time. The firing has now gone on for twenty minutes, and still flashes to and fro over the mill-pool, from door to window, and from window to door. A man named Walker is looking in at a broken window, when a ball from one of Cartwright's men strikes the edge of his hat. The enraged Luddite instantly leans in and fires at where the flash came from, taking the best aim he can. As he said afterwards : " I was determined to do it, though my hand was shot off for it, and hand and pistol had gone into the mill." It is very dark, nothing can be seen on either side but the jet of fire upwards and downwards as the besieged fire from behind the pavings stones, and the Luddites from their platoons. But now from the clamorous crowd outside came groans and screams; and the mob, either intimidated, dreading the coming sabres, or falling short of powder and ball, began to slacken their fire. That gave the mill people fresh courage, for they knew the Luddites were losing heart. Now the firing entirely ceased, except a shot or two at intervals. The wounded men were groaning with pain, and their comrades were trying to carry them off. The Luddites broke and separated towards Huddersfield ; one man fell in the mill dam, others slunk back to the Dumb Steeple Field ; a few crept up the beck. Mr. Cartwright, listening, could hear the heavy groaning of the poor wretches left under the windows wounded, but he was afraid to go out lest it should be afterwards said he had murdered the stragglers in cold blood. Then, the victorious defenders rested and rejoiced, or kept the alarm bell going. On a friend arriving, Cartwright went cautiously out and examined the field of battle, and removed the wounded men to a public-house near. "When the day broke, Cartwright went and examined the ruined mill-- the windows were destroyed, the doors chopped and broken, the paths to Huddersfield strewn with malls, hatchets, and hammers. There was a Luddite's hat floating in a dismal way about the mill dam. That night many glimpses were obtained of the retreating rioters. Some of the frightened Luddites were soon tracked. On the night of the attack on Rawfold Mill, a man named Brooks, who was wet through and without a hat, called at High town on a man named Naylor, from whom Mellor, the leading spirit all through this bad affair, borrowed a hat for his coadjutor. On the day after, a woman living at Lockwood saw a great many cloth-dressers come to the house of a man named Brook, whom she heard evidently telling " some sorrowful tale." She could tell that, by the motion of his hand. She heard only a few words, and those were, " That of all the dismallest dins anybody ever heard, that was the dismallest, and that you might have heard it half a mile, and I had rather be clemmed to death than be in such a stir again." Before any of the men could be arrested the irritation produced by the failure of the attack on Rawfold's mill had led to a fresh crime. A day or two after the repulse the croppers at Mr. Wood's mill at Longroyd Bridge were talking together, lamenting the loss of life among the Luddites at Cartwright's mill. Mellor, always foremost, then said there was no way of smashing the machinery but by shooting the masters. No one present seems to have protested against this proposition. Mellor, who had been to Russia, had brought back with him a large pistol of a peculiar kind, with a barrel half a yard long. It had been sold to a man named Hall for some pigeons. This pistol was borrowed on the afternoon of the 28th of April. At Hall's house Mellor loaded this pistol so heavily that Hall asked Mellor if he meant to fire that ? He thought the piece would jump back. Mellor replied, coolly, " Yes ; I mean to give Horsfall that." About five o'clock that day Mellor came into a room at Longroyd Mill, where a man named Walker was at work with three other men, and asked him to go with him and shoot Mr. Horsfall. The man did not then consent ; but half an hour after Mellor came again, put a loaded and primed pistol into his hand, and told him he must go with him and shoot Horsfall. Walker examined the pistol, found it nearly full, and consented.

This Mr. Horsfall—the man whom the four Luddites waited for in the narrow strip of a plantation on the Huddersfield road—was an excitable impetuous man, violent in manner, but kind and forgiving to his own workpeople. Against the Luddites, however, he was always implacable. Though he had offered to his neighbours, the Armitages, to pull down the obnoxious frames, he had been heard to express his wish to ride up to the saddlegirths in Luddite blood. The children, as he rode through Lingard's Wood, used to run out and cry, " I'm General Lud !" and he would invariably pursue the urchins with his horsewhip. This rash and impulsive man was about forty, and in the full flush of vigorous manhood. It was said that the Luddites had, on the night of the defeat at Rawfold's, tossed up a shilling to settle whether Cartwright's mill or Horsfall's mill should be first attacked. The other men were in a wood twenty yards nearer Huddersfield. They were to fire after Mellor and Thorpe had fired. This was at about six o'clock. At about half-past five Mr. Horsfall has mounted at the door of the George Hotel, Huddersfield, rash and defiant as usual, and ridden off. A few minutes after he was out of sight, Mr Horsfall's friend, a Mr. Eastwood, of Slaithwaite, who had often expostulated with the daring and obnoxious millowner on the imprudence of his intemperate language about the Luddites, called at the George to propose, for protection and companionship, to ride home with him. On hearing he had gone, he cantered quickly after him, hoping to overtake him. About six, Mr. Horsfall pulled up his horse at the Warren House Inn, at Crossland Moor. Finding there two of his old workpeople, Mr. Horsfall gave each a glass of liquor in a friendly way. He did not himself alight, but on the saddle tossed off a steaming glass of rum-and-water, and then rode off flushed with the grog. A man named Parr was about a hundred and fifty yards behind him. All the way from Huddersfield there had been an intermittent stream of people returning homeward—farmers in gigs, labourers with carts, and young squires riding gaily back to their country places. When Mr. Horsfall comes abreast of the plantation, Parr sees four men in dark-coloured clothes stooping about under the boughs. All at once there comes a crack, as of a gun, and a puff of smoke. Mr. Horsfall's horse jibs around, and the rider falls with his face on the horse's neck. Two shots had been fired. By a great effort the wounded man raises himself painfully up by the horse's mane, and calls out " Murder !" At that moment a man in a bottle-green top-coat (one of the four in ambuscade) springs on the wall with one hand and both feet. Parr riding up, seeing this, called out to the murderer " What, are you not contented yet?" and rode fast up to the wounded man, who was already dripping with blood. Horslall said to the farmer coming so providentially to his assistance : "Good man, you are a stranger to me, but pray ride on to Mr. Horsfall's house (his brother's), and get assistance. I am shot." Parr, supporting him in his arms—for he grew sick and faint, and was falling—said : " Are you Mr. Horsfall, of Marsden?" As he groaned " I am", the blood spurted from his side, and he fell off his horse. Parr then drew him to the side of the road, and a clothier named Bannister supported him in his arms till two boys came up with a cart and removed the dying man to the Warren House. When the surgeon came, he found poor Horsfall's pulse weak, faint, and tremulous, and he was pale and sick. One ball had passed through his left side to his right side, and nearly cut the femoral artery. The other ball had pierced his left thigh. He died in about thirty-eight hours. A labourer in the adjacent fields, who saw the murder perpetrated, was seized with terror, and fled. Another man, ignorant of the murder, saw four men run and clamber over a wall into Dungeon Wood. In getting over the bars, part of a pistol was seen under one of the men's coat, and the ploughman said to himself : "There go Luds ; we shall have mischief to-night!" The man (probably Mellor), seeing the pistol was observed, drew his top-coat down over it. Smith and Walker hid their pistols in two ant-hills in the wood, and also Mellor's powder-horn. Mellor and Thorpe then ordered their companions to go Honley way, and gave them two shillings to buy beer. They went on two miles further to Honley, and there drank seven or eight pints of ale. There was a drunken collier there, and the collier, pleased with Smith's excellent whistling, got up and tried to dance. Soon after, some pale frightened men came in from Huddersfield market, and brought word that Mr. Horsfall had been shot, and was lying half-dead at the Warren House. The next day Walker was sent for by Mellor to come into his shop at Longroyd Mill. Mellor, Thorpe, and Smith then produced a Bible, and ordered him to kiss it, and swear to keep the secret "in all its circumstances." Six other workmen had already been sworn. Mellor had burnt his finger in firing, and it was then bound up, while Thorpe's face had been scratched in running through the plantation. Mellor and Thorpe's pistols Mellor had left at his cousin's at Dungeon Wood, where the apprentices hid them under some flocks, and after that in the laite. At this house Mellor also left his own bottle-green top-coat and Thorpe's, and took his cousin's drab coat away as a disguise. The Luddites were now triumphant, and quiet and honest people were frantic with fear. We draw upon our local authority for a picture of the aspect of things at this crisis. There were, however, brave men still resolute and determined. "At Marsden, on the receipt of the intelligence, the authorities, undismayed, prepared for all emergencies, and redoubled their precautions. The headquarters of cavalry were at the house now belonging to Mr. Robert Taylor. It was then the principal inn in the village, and known as the Old Red Lion, kept by a landlord named John Race. The large room still exterding over the entire building—now applied to a far different purpose—was converted into barracKs for the cavalry, their horses being kept in the adjoining stables. At Ottiwells, where a portion of the infantry was continually on guard during the night, prompt measures against a probable attack were taken. Watch and ward was maintained by the soldiery and the local constabulary, a strict surveillance was kept over all suspected individuals, and no lights were permitted in any dwellings after nine o'clock in the evening. It was naturally anticipated that Woodbottom Mill and its proprietors would be the next objects of vengeance, and preparations were made to frustrate it. For months past, Enoch and James Taylor had slept in the mill in consequence of their lives being threatened and their own dwellings being unsafe, and they formed part of the mill garrison at night. Their future partner, Arthur Hirst, was the woollen engineer at the mill, and he vigorously laboured to convert the factory into a fortified place, becoming for the time a military engineer. The windows of the first storey were barricaded. The doors and window-shutters were coated inside with sheet iron. All communication between the first and upper storeys could be cut off, and the defenders inside were enabled to fire upon an attacking force from the upper storeys while sheltered themselves. A trap-door on a floor over the water-wheel had been so ingeniously planned by Arthur Hirst, that if the rioters had gained an entrance they would, on touching the flooring, drop through it into the wheel-race below. Such was the fear of the vengeance of the Luddites, that Mellor and his companions remained undiscovered for nearly a year. Though two thousand pounds (a large sum for poor workmen) was offered for their apprehension, they remained going in and out at Longroyd Mill just as usual, though several dozen men must have known of their guilt. At last, Benjamin Walker, tempted by the reward, betrayed them, and was admitted evidence for the Crown. A special commission was held at York, before Baron Thomas and Judge Le Blanc, for the trial of the Luddites, sixty-four in number, who were concerned in the disturbances in the West Riding. The assizes commenced on Saturday, January 2nd, 1813, and terminated on the 12th of the same month. Amongst the prisoners were three of the murderers of Mr. Horsfall, namely, George Mellor, William Thorpe, and Thomas Smith. The evidence against them was conclusive. The prisoners were defended by Henry, now Lord Brougham. At that day it was a peculiarity of the law in trials for such crimes as the prisoners were charged with, that while tbeir counsel could cross-examine the witnesses for the crown, and examine the witnesses for the defence, they could not address the jury on behalf of the accused. This palpable and cruel injustice no longer exists. Mr. Justice Le Blanc, the presiding judge, summed up the evidence clearly and impartially. At the close of the summing-up the jury retired, and returned in twenty-five minutes, bringing in a verdict of ' Guilty' against all the prisoners, who, upon being asked if they had anything to urge why sentence of death should not be passed upon them, severally declared that they were 'Not Guilty,' Thorpe adding, ' Evidence has been given false against me, that I declare.' Before and after the conviction an impression possessed many minds that Smith was not as culpable as the rest, and that he was as much sinned against as sinning. This feeling was strengthened by the fact that the jury singled him out from the rest, and, the day before the execution, recommended him to mercy ; but the recommendation was disregarded. The trial concluded on Wednesday, the 6th of January. In those days death followed quickly upon conviction, and on the Friday following the execution of the three men took place at York. In the short interval between conviction and execution the prisoners were very penitent, yet persistently refused to make any acknowledgment of their guilt. Mellor declared ' that he would rather be in the situation he was then placed in, dreadful as it was, than have to answer for the crime of their accuser (Walker);' adding, that 'he would not change places with him for his liberty and two thousand pounds.' To prevent the possibility of rescue, the place of execution was guarded by a strong force of cavalry and infantry, and at nine o'clock in the morning, in the presence of a vast assemblage of people, the murderers met their doom. Though deeply affected, they made no confession of their guilt. On the Saturday but one following, fourteen more persons were executed at York for crimes of a similar character; a wholesale execution which has since had no parallel in England." Walker, the informer, was ever after shunned and detested. His ill-earned money did not prosper; he became poor, and in his old age had to apply for parish relief at Huddersfield. "The members of the firm of Messrs. Abraham and John Horsfall took the death of their son and nephew greatly to heart; and the father, Mr. Abraham Horsfall, from thenceforth appeared to imbibe a dislike to Marsden. The use of the obnoxious machinery was discontinued at Ottiwell's and cropping by hand resumed ; and in a few years afterwards their mill property in Marsden was disposed of, Bankbottom Mills passing into the possession of Messrs. Norris, Sykes. and Priestley; and Ottiwells to Messrs. Abraham and William Kinder. It is related that, after his son's death, Mr. Abraham Horsfall never again entered the mill at Ottiwells, and when riding past on his way to Bankbottom, he invariably averted his face from the mill, as if its very sight was hateful aud painful to him." On the 9th of January, Haigh, Dean, Ogden, the three Brooks, Walker, and Hirst were tried for the attack on Cartwright's mill. Haigh, Dean, Ogden, Thomas Brook, and Walker were found guilty and hanged. The rest were acquitted. After this wholesome severity, the Luddites never made much lead in Yorkshire. The spirit of resistance was roused, leaders were wanting to the rioters, and the better class of workmen began to shrink from combinations that, beginning in destroying machinery, soon ripened into murder.— *All The Year Round.* 

----

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000470/18750921/016/0004

Berwickshire News and General Advertiser - Tuesday 21 September 1875

OLD STORIES RETOLD. THE LUDDITES.

He (Bonaparte) makes the quartern loaf and Luddites rise.  
Old Nottingham the Land Lud.

In the early part of the year 1811, the operation of the decrees of the Emperor of the French against British commerce, coupled with the equally bad effect of the retaliatory British Orders in Council, began to tell painfully on the condition of the working classes. After so many years of war the country was feverish and exhaustd. It might well be so. The National Debt had increased, since the accession of George III., by seven hundred millions or thereabouts, so that the total amount was at least eight times as great it had been in 1760 ; and the enormons sum of thirty-two and a half millions was absorbed yearly for the payment of interest; while Mr Pitt's Sinking Fund turned out a miserable failure. But for the foolish and wicked wars in which the Government had been engaged, the country might have been clear of debt; and, considering the industry of the bulk of the people, and its geographical and other advantages, it should have been the least heavily taxed part of Europe. But Pitt's continental system required the financial screw to be put on painfully tight. Poor people found infinite difficulty in making a iiving. Every article of consumption, on which it was possible raise a penny, was taxed to the utmost. The quartern loaf was at twenty pence. Salt was almost as dear it is said to be in Central Africa. And the scarcity caused by a series of bad harvests was intensified by the enactmentof worse laws. Disaffection filled the land, in spite of fulsome loyal addresses. For the people suffered most cruelly, and they thought they saw the cause of their sufferings in their sefish inconsiderate rulers. The food of many of them was of the worst sort, and not half sufficient in quantity. Hundreds and thousands of poor mothers aqd their ohildren were destitute of bread and even potatoes were to dear to be got at. The diet of these unfortunate creatures was oatmeal and water, and they had not enough even of that. Many actually perished for laok of sustenance.

While this was the sad condition of the working class, particularly in the manufacturing districts where myriads had been thrown wholly idle, or next to it, arising from stoppage of the export trade, and the inability of the home consumers to buy as much as they had done formerly, owing to their being so heavily taxed, the laws were barbarous in the extreme, quite so much so as they could ever be in Dahomey. Thus we have seen it stated that at Manchester, about the time we write of, a woman was tried and convicted of highway robbery, for taking some potatoes out of a cart in the street, and was hanged for it.

Thousands able and willing work compelled to have recoursoeto parochial relief for the support of themselves and families. At Nottingham, while the stagnation and distress were frightful, the parish overseers, hot being able to furnish the men with better employment, set them to clean and mend the roads. As might have been expected, these improvised scavengers hated that sort of work, and not being able to reach the real authors of their calamities and degradations, they turned their vengeance against their employers, to whose indifference to the well-being of the people under them they attributed the greater part of their misery. The factory system was still in its infancy, but was gradually extending over the land; and the large employment of new machines, for the lessening of hand labour and consequent cheapening of goods, coincident with the glut and stagnation caused by over-production, and non-intercourse with America as well as the Continent, roused the people to frenzy. It was these machines, they fancied, that did most of the mischief, and they therefore determined that the use of them should be given up.

The whole manhood left in the half-starved Nottingham stockingers, always a fierce set, seemed now to flow out in the breaking of stocking frames and other new-fangled appliances for doing away with hand labour. On the 11th of March, 1811, a large body of framework knitters assembled in the Market Place, and after working each other to a high degree of excitement, by a rehearsal of their unparalelled sufferings, and the alleged oppression which was committed upon them, by the several abatements which had lately taken place in the rate of wages, they expressed their determination to prevent any further restrictions, by taking prompt vengeance on those manufacturers who, they conceived, had been the most active in getting wages beaten down below the standard which men could keep body and soul together. The presence of the military saved the town for the nonce, but at Arnold, a village four miles off, the mob broke sixty three frames that very night, and rapidly did the mischievous contagion spread, that in less than three weeks at least 200 frames were broken to pieces in Nottingham and its immediate neighbourhood. Several persons were apprehended on suspicion of being concerned in these outrages ; but no sufficient evidence could be got to warrant their detention. They were, therefore, to the great exhultation of their companions, uniformly ordered to be discharged. Several Bow Street officers were sent down from London, to secure, if possible, the apprehension of some of these nocturnal marauders, but without success. The Royal Lancashire Militia, who happened be on their way from Worcester to Hull, were detained in the town for several weeks, and while they remained things were pretty quiet.

But on the 4th November, the frame-breaking was renewed, with circumstances more alarming than in the spring. The outrages spread over the whole county of Notts, as well into the shires of Derby, Leicester, Lancashire, and York. The rioters styled themselves Luddites, from one Ned Ludd, an diot [*sic*]] who had once broken some frames in a passion. The system pursued by them was to assemble, by a preconcerted arrangement, in parties of from six to sixty, according to the nature of the work to be done, under an acknowledged leader, styled General Ludd, who had the absolute command over them, and directed all their operations. Their place of destination being arrived at, and the object of their vengeance clearly pointed out, the guards, armed with swords, firelocks, and other offensive weapons were duly stationed in their proper places, with orders, at the peril of their lives, to allow no one to pass or to stir out of their houses. The pioneers, as they might be termed, were then ordered promptly to advance, enter or break in the door, as the case might be, and proceed to their work of demolition, which was generally but the task of a few minutes. This being completed, and the whole of the party reassembled, the leader called over the list of his men, who answered by a particular number, after which he discharged a pistol, as a signal that all was right, and then each one made his way from the scene of action, and got home as best could.

When the party about to be attacked had received timely notice of what was in store tor him, as was sometimes the case, and had taken measures of defence, the assailants usually took care to come in such force, and so well armed, as to make resistance hopeless. In several Bach caseß the gnsris sought safety in flight.

In an attack the house of a person named Hollingworth, of Bullwell, who had rendered himself specially obnoxious to the workmen, and who, expecting a nightly attack, had engaged seven or eight men, armed with muskets, to protect his frames, the first man who forced his way into the house received a shot the abdomen, which in a few minntes deprived him of life. Before he expired, however, exclaimed, " Proceed, my brave fellows; I die with a willing heart!" His companions conveyed the dead body to the borders of the forest, near which Hollingworth's house stood, and then with a fury irresistible by the force opposed to them, again attacked the house, and in about an hour and a half fully accomplished their object. The unfortunate leader of the attack turned out to be a man who had lived in the village of Arnold, and his dead body was removed thither for interment. The funeral scene was one of truly terrific character. From seven to eight hundred stockingers assembled in the graveyard. The excitement was tremendous, Yells, threats, denunciations, and cries for vengeance were heard on every side. The Riot Act was read amid conflicting shouts, and the military at last had to clear the churchyard, which they did fortunately, without shedding blood.

Scarcely a night passed after this that there were not violent outrages of some sort. The rioters extended their operations over the whole district, where they broke all frames employed in the making of *cut ups*, or worked either at reduced prices or by hands not regularly brought to the trade. The consequences were ruinous to many of the small frameworkers and others, who through fear were compelled to cease working, and have their machinery under military escort removed into the town as a place of security.

In the early part of December, the magistrates both of the town and county issued a notice calling upon all publicans to close their houses at 10 p.m., and directing further that all householders, their servants and dependants, should remain within doors after that hour, so long as the disposition to tumult, then prevalent, should continue. They also intimated that to enter a house in the night time, to demolish a frame, was in the eye of the law burglary, and punishable with death, and that all offenders would meet with the utmost severity. It was hoped, by the publication of this notice and the arrival of additional troops (the Royal Horse Guards Blue and the Berkshire Militia), that the outrages would have been checked, if not subdued. But this expectation proved illusive, for the Luddites only increased in boldness over the whole length' and breadth of the Midland hosiery district; and the frame-breaking went on without interruption during the month of December and into the January following.

On New Year's Day, 1812, universal distrust and gloom pervaded Nottingham. Wheat, at this time, was 108s per quarter, while every other article of domestic consumption, as tea, sugar, spices, &c. were double, and in some instances treble, their present prices; in addition to which, it may be added that the Income-tax, enforced with unsparing severity, was ten per cent, and all the assessed taxes on a similar scale. Our foreign trade had fallen off to the extent of about sixteen millions per annum, while the public expenditure had advanced seven millions upon the preceding year. Want and misery prevailed to an appalling degree ; and in the desperation of their circumstances it was noways unnatuarl [*sic*] that the working men of Nottingham, and other manufacturing towns like it, should be led to view almost every man as their enemy whose position gave him opportunity of controlling wages to any extent. The seeds of a social war were thickly sown, and, as in the case of Gadmus's teeth, ready to start up in the shape of armed men, for mutual extermination. On this occasion, the destruction of the machines, by which alone that employment could be furnished which the people clamoured and fonght for, was the mad means taken avenge themselves on their supposed oppressors. Everybody now sees that this was most unwise, but if true that " oppression will drive a wise man mad," it was not to be wondered at that the poor stockingers in the Midland Counties, at their wits' end how to live, should have been suddenly seized by this destructive frenzy.

To enumerate every instance of frame-breaking in Nottingham and the country round during the winter of 1811-12 would fill a good-sized volume. In Bailey's " Annals of Nottinghamshire" there are long details of some of the more flagrant cases. The utmost daring was shown by the mischief makers, who usually assembled soon after nightfall, with their faces blackened, and armed with lethal implements, and proceeded to the houses of those who were obnoxious to them, and posting guards round about to prevent a surprise, and then wreaking their vengeance in the most deliberate way. The town was meanwhile strongly garrisoned by soldiers, and tne authorities were all on the alert. But though the place was literally as if in a state of siege, and a secret committee was sitting in permanence, invested with a discretionary power to expend any sum not exceeding £2,000, for the purpose of obtaining such information as might be useful in bringing the rioters to punishment, and suppressing the disturbances, all seemed to be unavailing. Nothing could penetrate the mystery of " Luddism," nor break the bond of union which bound its devotees together. In spite of all their errors and all their crimes, therefore, it is impossible to withhold admiration from the stern integrity of purpose which thus led a number of poor men to withstand the tempting bribes of from a hundred to three hundred guineas, and in one instance five hundred to turn informants against their fellows.

The following letter from Nottingham, dated the 12th December, 1811, and printed in the *Gentleman's Magazine*, gives an account of these disturbances, which we deem worth quoting :—

"The insurrectional state to which this county has been reduced for the last month, has parallel in its history, since the troubled days of Charles the First, against which misguided Monarch it took so decided a part. These truly alarming tumults had origin in a complaint exhibited by the stocking-makers against some of the hosiers, on account of the latter abating the fashioning price of making some descriptions of stockings, and causing others, along with sandals, socks, caps, &c., to be cut out of pieces, in like manner as a tailor cuts garment; and the stockings, &c., thus made, were not only deprived of their proper loopy selvages, which are the grace, the ornament, and natural guarantee to the real value of the framework knitted stockings, but, many more could produced in any given time than could be of those properly fashioned, the wages of the workmen and the work itself were daily on the decline, as was also the credit of the trade. And if we add to these causes of complaint, the constant advancement in the price of every article necessary to human subsistence, the true causes of these disturbances will be found. The object of the workmen has been to destroy those machines, or frames, they are called in the dialect of the trade, that were employed in the making of pieces to be cut up into stockings, &c.; and indiscriminately by those belonging to the hosiers, who had rendered their names obnoxious by giving reduced prices. Day after day have the magistrates, both of the town and county, used every possible endeavour to restore tranquility ; day after day have they added to the strength and activity of the civil power, and called in additional aid of the military but, hitherto, their exertions have been but of little avail; mysterious organisation has been brought into existence, which baffles every ordinary effort to suppress it. The rioters appear suddenly in armed parties, under regular commanders ; the chief of whom, be whomsoever may, is styled General Ludd ; and his orders are as implicitly obeyed as if he had received his authority from the hands of a monarch; indeed, it is well understood, that disobedience to his command is punishable with death, according to a solemn oath administered to all the party ; and any person that gives information against any of them, subjects himself to the vengeance of the whole organised band, both in person and property ; some dreadful examples in the latter instance having already been inflicted, by the burning of hay-stacks, &c.; hence it is that so few impeachments are made, and few of the depredators apprehended."

Up to the close of 1611 [*sic*]], about 700 frames costing from £16 to £120 each, had been destroyed.

---



https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000470/18750928/012/0004

Berwickshire News and General Advertiser - Tuesday 28 September 1875

OLD STORIES RETOLD. THE LUDDITES.

The town was, as already said, full of military — between 800 and 900 cavalry and 1,000 infantry, in addition to the local civil and military force — a larger force, it was admitted in Parliament, than had ever before been found necessary, at any period of our history, to be employed in the quelling of a merely local disturbance. Yet all, as we have seen, was insufficient for the purpose. Indeed, the officers and soldiers, as is too often the case, were not the best sort of men to conciliate and pacify disaffected people. On the contrary, their conduct rather irritated than soothed those they were sent down amongst to preserve the King's peace. Thus the theatre had to be abruptly closed, by order of the magistrates, in consequence of tumultuous proceedings that took place there on several successive evenings. Some red-coated worthies were in the habit, it seems, of coming in quite sober, of course, at half-price, and as soon the curtain fell, of vociferating " God save the King!" and those who did not instantly obey their second imperious mandate, which was " Hats off !" were assailed with oaths, sticks, swords, &c. The stockingers, who were all what would have been called red-hot Radicals, had that term then been in use, naturally resented this military dictation. The cry of the drunken officers was answered by one of " Millions, be free !" and the people rose with their hats on. A free exchange of blows was to be looked for after this; it wonld have been miraculous had there not been a row; both sides equally enjoyed the fun; and both got their heart's fill of kicks and cuffs, and bufferings and bruises. Some of the Radicals got smart blows with the officers' canes in the pit and boxes of the theatre; and some of the officers got still smarter ones in the street after they had left the house, from the bludgeons the mob. In short, the people of Nottingham, particularly "the gods," conceived that no person had any right to order them to stand up and take off their hats, at the word of command, when a particular tune was played, either in the theatre or any where else. And the noisy loyalty of the militia officers, far from inclining the "fierce democratic" to more courteous behaviour, only tended to embitter them still more against all constituted authority, arbitrary, tyrannical, and wantonly oppressive.

On the 6th February, 1812, Mr Whitbread brought the subject of the riots at Nottingham under the consideration of the House of Commons, and inquired if Ministers were prepared to go into investigation of the subject. Eight days later, Mr Ryder, the Home Secretary, moved for leave to bring in bills " for more exemplary punishing persons found guilty destroying stocking and lace frames," &c. To the penal clauses of this bill, which made the of framebreaking, whether by day or night, till the 1st March, 1814, an offence punishable with death, some show of opposition was made in both Houses of Parliament, but it was ultimately carried and received the Royal assent. It was far beyond the wisdom of the Legislature, of course to devise any scheme for the abatement of that misery under which the people groaned, or the amelioration of those laws the injustice of which they complained of. All that it could undertake was to visit them with Draconian pains and endeavour to crush, their free, independent spirit, by depriving them of the right to carry arms for their own defence, which it had always been supposed was an Englishman's privilege. To suspend the Habeas Corpus Act, and place the disturbed districts under Martial Law, was the approved catholicon of Lord Castlereagh and his colleagues, and their proposal to that effect met with but feeble resistance from the Whigs, whose Liberalism was more of a profession than principle.

At the Lent Assizes, which took place previous to the new penal Act coming into force, a number of men, some of them mere youths, were found guilty of being concerned in breaking frames, and sentenced to seven and fourteen years' transportation. Some of these convicts got on well in New South Wales and Van Diemen's Land, and died possessed of considerable property, a thing which they were very unlikely to have done had they not been sent across the seas, for their own as well as their country's good.

Adding a new capital crime to our already sufficiently barbarous code was not the likeliest or best means, as events soon showed, of deterring the stockingers from acts of violence; for on the night of the 27th of April an extensive manufacturer and hosier in the town of Nottingham, named Trentham, was shot at while standing in the porch at his own house door, and wounded very severely. Rewards to the amount of six hundred pounds were offered for the discovery of the assassins, who were two in number, but in vain. For though it was almost certain that several persons were privy to the plot, and though strong suspicion fell on two desperate fellows, known to be connected with Luddism, yet nothing came out to incriminate them.

What may be termed sporadic cases of frame-breaking took place at intervals during the ensuing summer and autumn, and likewise in the following year, but nothing particularly calling for notice occurred till the evening of the 14th October, 1813, when a desperate affray took place between a strong party of police officers stationed in house at Basford, to protect an informer named Garton from threatened violence, and a numerous band of Lnddites armed with pistols, who broke into the place in search of their man, but were driven out after some smart firing, leaving their leader, afterwards ascertained to be a very intelligent but hot-headed man named Samuel Bamford, dead on the parlour floor, one of the officers having shot him with a blunderbuss. Bamford had been the pet companion of a man named Towle, who had been apprehended on Garton's information. He was a man of small stature, but with courage and energy sufficient enough to qualify him for enterprises of the most hazardous kind. Under more favourable circumstances he might have writ his name in his country's annale, by the side of Moore, Wolfe, Nelson, and Wellington.

On their precipitate retreat from Garton's house after their leader's death, the Luddites shot through the head respectable framework knitter, named Kilby, who, hearing the affray, had ventured to open his front door, and look out to see what was going on.

In Bamford's case,a verdict of "Justifiable homicide" was returned; in Kilby's, one of "Wilful murder by some person or persons unknown." Large rewards were offered for the discovery of the perpetrators of the outrage, but the guilty individuals, and their associates, kept their own counsel.

The Luddite conspiracy, if it may be termed such, extended far beyond the confines of Nottinghamshire. In the counties of Lancaster, York, Derby, &c., similar disturbances occurred of more or less serious character. Threatening letters were written. Houses were set fire to. Sums of money were demanded and extorted. Arms were carried off. Machinery was broken. This seemed not to be the effect of any sudden impulse, but of an organised system of violence. The stimnlus, however, was everywhere the same—hunger, enforced idleness, and hatred of the upper classes, owing to the idea that they were all banded together to oppress the poor working man. But there was no evidence to prove any political plot, no agitators among persons in the higher ranks, no open blatant demagogy, like a Kenealy's. It was a spontaneous movement of the people's'own, arising solely from the dearness of provisions and other causes of distress, aggravated by the conviction, to some extent well founded, that the Government and its supporters had very much to do with bringing that distress about, and intensified it while it lasted.

A special commission was issued for the trial of some Luddite gangs in Yorkshire, and opened by Baron Thompson, at York, on the 4th of January, 1813. The jury having found twenty-one of the men guilty of administering illegal oaths, riotously assembling, destroying the frames and looms of manufacturers of hosiery, lace and cloth, breaking into houses and robbery, fifteen of them were sentenced to suffer death, and six to be transported for seven years. The fifteen were all hanged at the same time, "in terrorem of others." Sixteen others, less deeply implicated, were discharged on bail, and fifteen, against whom nothing could be proved, were discharged without bail.

On the same occasion, George Mellor, of Longroyd Bridge, William Thorp, and Thomas Smith, of Huddersfield, were indicted for the wilful murder of William Horsfield [*sic*], of Marsden, merchant and manufacturer, at Lockwood, in the West Riding. Benjamin Walker, an accomplice, gave evidence against them. Horsfell had made himself obnoxious to the Luddites, through his being the possessor of a set of shears, which they found they could not get at to break, and therefore they determined to shoot him. They were all three found guilty and hanged.

At the Peace of 1814 new life seemed to be given to these disgraceful trade outrages, which accordingly, after a lull of a few months, broke out again worse than ever. In all the counties already named, numerous bodies of unemployed artisans committed great excesses. In Yorkshire several mills were burned down. At Huddersßeld a great number of armed men, with their faces disguised by broad black marks down each cheek and over the forehead, broke into several houses, threatening the inmates with immediate death if they stirred a foot, ransacked all the drawers, and carried off whatever sums of money they found. At Sheffield similar outrages took place. At Stafford the Luddites, from eighty to a hundred strong, broke into houses in search of arms, and after getting what they wanted, left the inmates in a state of terror. At New Radford, near Nottingham, on the morning of the 16th of June, 1816, a fierce attack was made by strong party on the premises of a Mr Wright, and twelve valuable point-net lace machines were broken, in retaliation for the real supposed infringement of some trade regulations. Some ofthe party were apprehended and tried. Intense excitement thereupon prevailed. The prisoners seemed to have the entire sympathy of their class. The principal ground of defence was an *alibi*, but their safety lay in the court being intimidated. The result was a verdict of acquittal, in the absence of direct and positive proof of guilt. Had it been otherwise, both jnuge and jury would in all likelihood have been murdered, as the mob, well armed, had complete possession of the court room for hours, and during the progress of the trial and summing up of judge, expressions were given loud utterance to of the most fearful import. When the verdict was announced, the whole place rang again with loud cheers, which were taken by the crowd in the street, and reverberated to the sky. 

On the 20th of November, in the same year, James Towle, stocking-maker, a leading man among the Luddites, was executed at Leicester for the crime of frame-breaking. The offence for which he suffered was committed at Loughborough. Towle had been carefully brought up by honest and industrious parents, who, though in humble life, sent him to one of the best day schools in Nottingham, where he was a schoolfellow with Henry Kirk White. He died like Martyr going to glory.

The Watch and Ward Act was enforced in Nottingham, on and after the 2nd December, 1801, the continued outrages rendering such a step necessary for the protection of life and property, neither the constabulary nor the military being found sufficient. The distress caused by the great changes of employment consequent on the sudden return to peace after twenty years of war, and the disbanding of the immense forces employed so long at sea and on land, had brought about a rapid increase of serious crimes, and the common people having got it into their heads that in every case of class difference or dispute the law was in the wrong, disaffection spread over the land to its utmost borders.

On the 31st of March and 1st of April, 1817, eight men, named respectively Clarke, Savidge, Withers, Amos, Crowther, Mitchell, Towle and Watson, were convicted at Leicester of being concerned in an attempt to shoot a man, named Asher, at Loughborough. Two accomplices, named Blackborne and Burton, were the chief witnesses against them. Blackborne acknowledged that it was himself who fired at Asher, but all his accomplices, except Clark and Watson, who were repreaved, suffered death, while the traitor got off. On the scaffold these men conducted themselves with a firmness seldom witnessed on such a melancholy occasion. They were all tall, well-made, well-dressed, fine-looking fellows, seeming worthy of a better fate. A troop of hussars were in attendance, as well as the yeomanry cavalry, in case any attempt at rescue or disorder should have been made. Happily the whole passed over without interruption. The bodies of the victims, after being cut down, were placed in shells, and put into two carts, in which they were taken for interment to Nottingham, to which neighbourhood they all belonged. The funerals were most affecting scenes.

Nothing, we are told, could exceed the consternation felt in Nottingham upon the fact, first transpiring that such men as Savidge, Mitchell, Crowther, and some others, had been the leading perpetrators of the murders by which Luddism had latterly become distinguished, for they had all been well brought up, and each received a decent education, and were always looked upon, by society in general, as respectable, well-conducted individuals.

The last executions we find on record directly connected with Luddism are those of three men named Brandreth, Turner, and Ludlow, who suffered the last penalty of the law at Derby, on the 7th November, 1817, having been convicted of high treason at a special commission held there on the 15th October previous. Twenty-three Luddites altogether were tried on that occasion, while the bills against twelve were thrown out by the Grand Jury. Several of those convicted were reprieved.

The Luddites were charged with setting fire to Belvoir Castle, though there was not the slightest proof that they had done it. That splendid place, the seat of the Duke of Rutland, was more than half burned down, on the 16th of October 1816, with much plate and many paintings, including " The Nativity," by Sir Joshua Reynolds, valued at three thousand guineas. How the fire originated was, we believe, never known, but most likely it was accidental.

Cobbett wrote several powerful letters to the Luddites, in his *Political Register* for 1816, warning them against the commission of those acts by which they had made themselves infamous, and which he truly told them was not unlikely to throw back the cause of freedom in this country for ever so long. As to their employers, he endeavoured to show them that those circumstances which appeared to them to have arisen from their avarice, had, in fact, arisen from their want of the means, more than from their want of inclination, to afford the people who worked for them competence in exchange for their labours, He demonstrated that their notions hostile to machinery were the result of thoughtlessness; that machinery was not evil, but an advantage ; that the labour saved by its use was always available for some better purpose ; and that, if the powerful assistance of the wind and water, and steam and clockwork, were thrown aside, we should soon find ourselves making a rapid progress towards the feebleness of savage life. It was heavy taxation, not machinery, he said, that was at the root of their grievances. It was the enormous price the nation was paying for wicked war. It was the sum taken from those who laboured, whether with head or hands, to be given to those who did not labour, which had mainly caused the misery. There can be little doubt but these letters of Cobbett's, animated as they were by good sound sense and kindly feeling, did much to exorcise the evil spirit of machine breaking, as well to spread truer notions of political economy among the working men of the Midland Counties.

---

Cobbett Letters to luddites

https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2016/11/30th-november-1816-letter-to-luddites.html


Nottinham curfew 1811
https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2011/12/5th-december-1811-nottingham-under.html