https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000082/18171014/002/0002?browse=true
Morning Chronicle - Tuesday 14 October 1817
TO THE EARL OF LIVERPOOL

My LORD, Oct. 10, 1817.

To those who have carefully perused the indictment of the *forty-eight* men who are to be tried for *High Treason* on the 15th of this month, at *Derby*, it must not be matter of some surprise that Ministers, after the issues of their late political adventures in the Courts of Justice, should once more endeavour, on similar grounds, to make out a case of high treason against the whole people of Great Britain, as a justification of having deprived them of the benefit of the constitution and the protection of the law.

That the aforesaid *forty-eight* men may have committed an atrocious riot, that acts of violence and robbery may have been among the consequences, and that even murder may have been committed, is all very possible-although I see not a word in the indictment respecting a foul murder said, on very good authority, to have been committed; while it is repeatedly set forth, that the rioters came forth "with intent to attack, fight with, kill and destroy the soldiers, troops and forces of our Lord the King;" in order "to subvert and destroy the Government and Constitution."

Now, my Lord, recollecting that "our Lord the King" has an army of one hundred and forty-nine thousand veterans, commanded by officers oF the highest gallantry and greatest skill, we naturally inquire, who are these *forty-eight* men, what their connections, and what the means in possession or prospect whereby they were to carry into execution the enterprise stated in the indictment? and that document describes them as follows, namely, one *tailor*-one *swyer*-one *blacksmith*-one *farmer*-one *stone-getter*- two *stone-masons*- and *forty-one labourers* !-It is true that we are there told of five hundred and upwards who joined in the tumult. But does not our common sense revolt at seeing in such a tumultuary proceeding a scheme for subverting the Government?

TO DO FROM HERE

Why, my Lord, are not these men tried for their *real* and *visible* crimes, if, as reported, of much atrocity ? Is not the law in our too well-known criminal code sufficiently strong to punish them ? But why, through the sides of these *forty-eight* rioters, is an attempt to be made to justify the punishmnent which, on mere green bag *imputations*, has actually been and continues to be inflicted on the whole people of Great Britain by the functionaries who administer the government ?

As an " intent to subvert and destroy the Government and Constitution" is the grand, but as yet the merely *imputed* and *invisible* crime charged on the Derbyshire *tailor* and his companions, will not the people be apt to ask-' Who are their prosecutors ?- Who are they who have taken away the protection of the the law, and even *suspended* the Constitution ?-Is not the a constitution *suspended*, a constitution *subverted* and *destroyed*?— Is it not an insult to the understanding of a nation to tell them they have a constitution, and at the same time to say, the functionaries who in trust administer the government have a right at any time, and for what length of time, and as often as they please, to *suspend* that constitution ?-Are men who have done all this the prosecutors of the Derbyshire *tailor* and his riotous companions, on a charge of *intending* " to subvert and destroy the government and constitution?" '

Suppose, my Lord, that by inference piled on inference, interpretation tacked to interpretation, construction coupled with construction, a plain Derbyshire Jury should be so puzzled and confounded by the metaphysical distinctions and law fictions of the ten or twelve learned Barristers who it is said are retained by the Crown against the prisoners, as to be unable to distinguish what is from what is not a treason, so explained as to be incomprehensible, and should such Jury be thereby moved and induced by the instigation of the many gentlemen of the long robe to find a verdict of guilty, your Lordship will recollect that another verdict will remain to be given before the nation will be satisfied-namely, the verdict of dispassionate reason at the bar of the public.

When it is an obvious object of great interest to Ministers, that these *forty-eight* men, or some one or more of them, should be found " Guilty", that some colour may be given to that accusation against the the whole people of Great Britain as traitorously inclined, on which they have been deprived of the protection of law, and their constitution has been taken from them, your Lordship may rest assured, that a mere superficial unfounded verdict of guilty against these *forty-eight* rioters, would not, at the bar of the public, be taken as a proof of that crime on the part of the people, for which they have been, and continue to be, punished as aforesaid.

As a person convicted of high treason is not only to suffer an ignominious, but a cruel death; so a proof of that uncommon crime ought not to depend on slippery inferences and suppositions, but to be so plain and palpable that no man of sense could doubt it. A proof by construction hanging on construction, savours too much of the ludicrous reasonings of the adepts of *derivation*.

In the way of ridicule your Lordship may have see heard " Pickled cucumber" thus derived from "Jeremiah King."-" Jeremiah King"-" Jerry King"-"Jerkin"-" Girking"-" Pickled cucumber." Let us hope that nothing so ludicrous will be played off at *Derby*, for deriving high treason from a licentious tumult of a misguided, stupid rabble!

Among other inferences in the indictment, is this; that because the rioters robbed some houses of *arms*, ergo, it was with intent first, to conquer the army; secondly, to kill the King; and thirdly, to subvert to and destroy the government; but what Lawyer when indicting for burglary a man, who had first stolen the pistols of the owner of the house broken into, and then actually killed him, ever inferred that the burglar had thereby proved by overt act his intent to subdue the army; to kill the King and subvert the State ? and yet a house is a component part of a country; and a man, an individual of that aggregate, we call the nation the community or state.

Touching that part of the indictment, my Lord, which *accounts* for the depravity of mind-the seat of so *intention*, which constitutes *crime*,-it is said that the *tailor* and his companions were " *moved and seduced in 4y the instigation of the Devil*" to do as they did. This I take to be a fact; because I have been credibly informed, that a *Devil* in human shape was particularly active in the work of *seduction* and *instigation*.

If this were the case, and if this *Devil* was not of the in number of " those other false traitors, whose names are to the Jurors unknown," but was equally known to Jurors and prosecutors, as in crime he stood pre-eminent, so in the indictmnnt he ought to have been placed foremost.

A *Devil* always critically considers the circumstances and desires, the weaknesses and interests of those he tempts or deludes; and if he be a subordinate *Devil*, doing the work of superiors, he is equally studious of their interests and wishes. Supposing, therefore, the fact set forth in the indictment, that the prisoners were " moved and seduced by the instigation of the *Devil*," we have to consider in what way the *Devil* there alluded to would naturally go to work.

Ever keeping in view the grand object of his employers, would he not affect to hold them in particular hatred and contempt ? and, well knowing the poverty and misery or those he addressed, would he not endeavour to persuade them, that by acting on his *information* and advice their misery would soon be at an end, and their condition be greatly bettered? Would he not attribute their past sufferings to unnecessary wars, to an extravagant expenditure, profligate jobs, sinecures, pensions, and the long et cetera of corruption; as *Devils* themselves always speak as much truth as necessary for obtaining credit to the falsehoods in reserve ?

Would he not display great knowledge and eloquence on all the abominations of the borough system ? and then slide into a transition on Parliamentary Reform, and the unavailing petitioning against that borough evil ? Would he not praise to the skies the leaders in this reform, profess to be in their bosom confidence, and insinuate that he himself was not only a patriot of the first order, but of the most determined character?

Would he not artfully suggest ideas of measures, by which the crafty and vicious among them might foresee the means of robbing their neighbours, while pretending to serve the public ? And for betraying his dupes into the snares prepared for themn, would he not at the same time flatter and cajole them by appealing to their ignorance on the true means of resisting tyranny ?

Would he fail to cite our greatest writers to shew, not only the lawfulness but the duty of such resistance? And would he not take especial care to quote the learned Blackstone, to shew that resistance to Kings and Rulers is " necessary, when the contracts of Society are in danger of dissolution, and the law proves too weak a defence against the violence of power and oppression?"

Having thus, by the doctrines of truth and common sense, prepared his pupils for the trap he had in readiness, would he not first expatiate on the *prudence* with which resistance by arms ought ever to be accompanied, and then affect to let them into the important secret that the proper moment had arrived ? And would he not proceed to assure them, that every thing was completely ripe for recovering their rights and redressing their grievances. by a general rising of the nation; and express his surprise that they should be in ignorance of so important a truth? Would he not here detail all the necessary particulars, assuring them that on certain previous movements, intended for signals, the people of the metropolis and of all the most populous parts of the country, would burst forth on a sudden with proper leaders at their head; that the army was ready to join theni; and that as the object of the union was to restore the constitution, it would therefore be the duty of all to join, in so good a work; and that then, having the strength of the nation on their side, the part he recommended was the dictate of *prudence* as well as patriotism ?

If, my Lord, the Derbyshire *tailor*, the *sawyer*, the *blacksmith*, and their companions, were thus " moved and seduced by the instigation of the Devil" in question ; and if they really believed that such was the sentiment of a great majority of the nation, and such the duty of men who loved their country and its Constitution, you must widely differ from *Blackstone*, from *Locke*, from the *Runnymead Barons*, the Author of the *Bill of Rights*, the *Act of Settlement*, and that *constellation great men* who effected the *glorious Revolution* that opened the way to the throne for the present family, if you should. not think it very difficult to denominate the misconduct of those deluded persons' treason; but perfectly certain that the conduct of their seducer was perfectly diabolical.

Your father, my Lord, has told us that "the Constitution of every free Government is subject, from time to time, to a sort of dangeross crisis, which demands the attention of all who are concerned for its preseravation." "If the Constitution is only through age impaired, *it must be called back to its first principles*.— The history of this country abounds with more of these critical periods than any other ; and it is owing to the proper use our ancestors made of them, that our Government has long been advancing by various steps to perfection ; they withstood the repeated attempts both of Papal innovation and regal oppression; and though their struggles frequently produced violent fevers in the State, *yet the Constitution always came forth in more perfect health*, and some new security was obtained for our freedom."

FITZWILLIAM

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000082/18171018/004/0002?browse=true
Morning Chronicle - Saturday 18 October 1817
We would willingly persuade ourselves that there can be but one feeling among men of all parties in the country, as to the line of conduct which his Majesty's Ministers are pursuing, with respect to those unfor- tunate individuals now under trial for the highest crime known in our law. A  ...

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000082/18171018/004/0003?browse=true
Morning Chronicle - Saturday 18 October 1817
STATE TRIALS

....



prequel
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18171015/009/0003


NEED THE SATURDAY REPORT ETC

Editorial comment on the exchange in the Morning Chronicle - Wednesday 22 October 1817 https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000082/18171022/006/0002?browse=true#

It has been the constant and zealous practice of the Editor of this paper, from his first connection with the press, to support the cause of humanity wherever assailed. Justice requires that Jurors shauld not be prejudiced who are to sit on the trial of their fellow creatures; and therefore, when we saw attempts made to spread reports injurious to the miserable wretches about to be tried at Derby, in a paper that boasts of the countenance of Ministers, we felt it our duty to expose the cruel and unprecedented measure. That we were not the only persons who saw the insidious conduct of *The Courier* in the same light, may be proved by reference to every impartial Journal in Town.

This disingenuous practice was complained of by the Counsel for the Prisoner, who justly felt, that by the garbled reports of the former trial, the new Jurors might be influenced against the Prisoner then put to the Bar. That we may not be supposed to conceal any part of the proceeding on this complaint, we take the account of it from a Morning Paper, in preference to that of our own Reporter. But what will the public think of the manner in which *The Courier* of last night speaks of this complaint? " Previously to the comnmencement of the trial," says the Editor, " Mr. "DENMAN, Counsel for the Prisoners, *instructed by "the Agents of Traitors*, no doubt, complained to the Court," &c. Instructed by the Agents of Traitors !- and " Mr. DENMAN followed his instructions !"-Such is the decent language of *The Courier*. Mr. DENMAN'S instructions could only come from the Solicitors appointed to defend the Prisoners. We make no comment on this insolent and outrageous insinuation, not against Mr. DENMAAN only, but against the whole Bar. What! shall it be said that the British Bar take instructions from the Agents of Traitors, and *follow* them? After this, the gross and diabolical charge against this Paper-" that to please the Opposition in " Parliament it would have Traitors escape-that no "grounds may be made out for the suspension of the *Habeas Corpus*-to please the low detestable faction " of assassins who call themselves Reformers-to please those *divers other Traitors* unknown-it " would have Traitors escape that rebellion may ". prosper"-proves to what a depth of malignity this paper has recently fallen.

??GET THE COURIER RESPONSE...



TH: the "verbatim" report in the  Morning Chronicle - Wednesday 22 October 1817 https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18171022/009/0003 is slightly different to the above... eg Denham on Oliver

STATE TRIALS.

Derby, OCTOBER 20.

The legal advisers of the prisoners having determined stifl to persist in their plan of chailenging the Jury on the part of their clients, separately, *William Turner* was the person selected by the Officers of the Crown to be tried next. This man was formerly in the Militia, but, having volunteered in the 20th Regiment of Foot, he has since bean abroad, and in Egypt and elsewhere fought the battles of his country. He is a tall man, 47 years of age.

He Was brought from the gaol in the same mnanner as had been pursued with Brandreth, linked to the wrist of Mr. Eaton, jun. at about a quarter before vight. He is a man of plain appearance: he was dressed very decently, in a blue coat and coloured waistcoat.

The Court having assembled at eight o'clock, and the confusion resulting from the admission of the public having subsided, the prisoner was put to the bar.

The Lord Chief Baron then called on the Attorney-General and the Counsel for the Crown to proceed with their challenges.

PUBLICATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS.

Mr. Denman immediately rose, and addressed the Bench to the following effect -I feel myself bound in justice to the prisoners, as well as by a sense of the respect due to the Court, to bring under the notice of your Lordislips a most gross violation of your orders, and a most scandalous contempt of your authority, calculated in a high degree to poison the due administratin of justice, while it manifestly is a barefaced contempt of the authority of this Court, and calls for the severest visitation which any Cuourt of Justice can exert in vindication of its own authority and in protection of judicial fairness. This paper which I hold in my band (*The Courier* of Friday) gives a Statement of the proceedings in this Court in direct violation of the distinct and repeated prohibitions of yoor Lordships. It is not a full statement, but a partial, and garbled representation, which not only prejudices the prisoner then on his trial, but all the prisoners; so that it has become impossible for the other prisoners to obtain an unprejudiced jury and witnesses to try their causes. This bare-faced attempt to elude the prohibitions, and to laugh at the authority of the Court, becomes the more injurious, as the first blowv has been struck by a paper well known to be under the influence of Government.

Mr. Justice ABBOTT.-I know no paper under the influence of Government, or under any influence.

Mr.DENMAN—Well, perhaps I was wrong in using the expression ; but *The Couruier* newpaper published the garbled arccsunt, and the other papers copied it expressly "from The Courtier of last evening." (The Morningd Chronicle* gives what V*The Courier* omitted, by way of correcting the mis-statement; the one paper contending, that: Oliver was the source of the disturbances, the other publishing the evidence to repel that surmise, and thus the authority of the Court has been by both set at defiance, and the administratioin of justice poisoned.

The Cheif Baron—The Court will then repeat its prohibition.

Mr. DENMAN—My Lord, that has already been done once, and again, and to no effect.

CHIEF BARON— Who has published that statement?

Mr. DENMAN—That I know not; all I know is, that here I read a gross and mischievous violation of the prohiibition, and your Lordiship distinctly stated, that the Court would visit any violation with punishment.

The ATTORNEY-GENERAL—Till within in these ten minutes I knew nothing of this publication. Yesterday I called repeatedly for *The Courier*, but I was told it was in hand, and did not see it. Within theses ten minunstes, somebody, I know not wvho, sent me *the Courier*. I have not seen *The Morning Chronicle*. I lament, as much as my Learnied Friend, that the authority of this Court, and the interests of justice, have been thus violated; but I will say for myself, and for my Honourable and Learned Friend here (Solicitor-General), and for every one who has any office under Government, that it has been our anxious wish that, till the whole proceedings should be finished, not one phsrase should be published on the subject. As to any newspaper being under the influence of Government, I can truly state, thet I know not any one paper to be on one side or another, but according to the occasional statements I read in them. But whether the offender be on the side of Government or against it, when he is, upon proper affidavit, brought before your Lordships, I shall readily move for due punishment. There is here a professed account of what was stated by me. I can only say that I lament it most extremely, as a manifest violation of your Lordships' prohibition; and I lament and reprobate it as extremely inmproper to be stated, even if correctly stated, because it creates discussions and brings forward certain transactione, which must prejudice the administration of justice. I reprobate and lament it as much as y Learned Friend, but as the matter is now befssre the Court I cannot proceed further. I would request gentlemen who take notes not to forward them to the newspapers till the trials are finished, as it might become my duty to submit some motion respecting them, if supported by sufficiert affidavits. I know le not who has published this statement, but it may be said as an apology that it was done for a certain purpose, Which I may mention— namely, for the sale of the paper.

Mr. DENMAN.-I most fully acquit the Attorney-General, I need not say acquit, for I never supposed him capable, of coutenancing such an act as I complain of. However, I protest against the apology insinuated as utterly insufficient. It cannot be directly arnd gravely mentioned that the administration of justice should be poisoned With impunity, because the motive was the sale of a newspaper. I have only to say, that I hope the Court will adopt some measures to vindicate its own authority, and to keep pure the administration of justice.

The CHIEF BARON— I consider the publication in question very improper and very mischievous. It is most mishievous to all concerned. But all we know is, that it has appeared in a newspaper. We cannot tell who has done it, and therefore nothing can be done. When a motion is made in circumstances such as the Attorney-General has stated, then the Court will effectually interpose.

Mr. Justice DALLAS.— I recollect in the trial of James Watson, Mr. Wetherell, the Counsel, made a complaint of the same kind. I have the notes now before me; and my Lord Ellenborough said, "As you have no motion to make on the subject, the time of the Court must not be wasted by any further observations." With respect to any fact, we have here no fact before us. All we know is, that there is one statement published, by whom or under what circurmstances we know not. As to the observaiton that the paper is under the influence, of Government, it ought not to have been made, because that cannot be known, and becceare it may excite a suspicion that the Government wished to obtain the conviction of the prisoners by unfair means. As no motion is made, the Court can do nothing further.

The other Judges said nothing, and thus the discussion terminated. 

THE KING V. WILLIAM TURNER. 

Mr. Lownden now proceeded in the usual form to intimate to the prisoner at the bar his right to challenge the Jury as then came to the book to be sworn; after which he called over thhe nauese of the Jurymen in the order in which they had been summoned.

There were several challenges on the part of the crown. For the prisoner there were 55 perenmptory challenges, namely:—

Wm. White, of Inderidgehay, farmer  
Robt. Beard, Dalbury, ditto.  
Wm. Salt, ditto, ditto.  
John Heacock, Erwall, Esq.  
Wm. Bailey, ditto, farmer.  
Thos. Archer, Hatton, ditto.  
Thos. Orme, ditto, ditto.  
Sam. Archer, Hallington,ditto.  
Thos. Hall, ditto, ditto.  
Walthal Sportier, ditto, ditto.  
Robert Wagstaff, ditto.  
Wm. Bakwell, Sudbury, ditto.  
Thomas Hollis, ditto, ditto.  
Luke Turner, ditto, ditto.  
Henry Hall, Sutton, ditto.  
Thos. Stratton, Tinsaley, ditto.  
Wm. Walker, ditto, ditto.  
Rich, Spencer, Ashleyhay, ditto.  
Thos. Cooper, Atlow, ditto.

John Mooreroft, Boylestone, maltster.  
J. Hurley, Edvoston, farmer.  
Willianm Briggs, Alvaston and Boutlon, ditto.  
Richard Buxton, Clifton, ditto.  
Wm. Levern, Elvaston, ditto.  
Robert Briggs, ditto.
B. Pickerinsg, Markeaton, ditto.  
T. Lowudes, Marston Montgomery, farmer.  
John Bradsha, Osbiston and Thiervaston, ditto.  
Robert Shipton, Scropton. do.  
John Stretton, ditto, ditto.  
Robert Steeple, ditto.  
John Skevington, Yeaveley.  
W. Beresford, Snelston, gent.  
Solomon Frost, ditto, farmer.

The followiing Jury (of whom some were challenged for Brandreth) was at length sworn:—

Thos. Ensor, Marston on Dove, farmer  
Henry Spurrier, dito, ditto  
M. Goodall, Marston Montgomery, ditto, ditto.
Thos. Hall, Sutton, ditto.  
Sam. Dean, Aahleyhay, ditto.

T. Wagstaff, Arlow, farmer.  
Jos. Wheeldon, Alvaston, do.  
James Osborne, ditto, ditto.  
T. Crompton, Darley Abbey, gt.  
J. Glover, Findern, farmeer.  
J. Haslam, Chester, ditto.  
T. Ordish, Mickleover, ditto.

The Gentlemen who had served on the last Jury, on being called, were asked by the Learned Judge wheether they wished to be excused serving on the present. They all answeraed in the affirmative, and were excused accordtingly.

The case having been opened by Mr. BALGUY,

The SOLCITOR-GENERAL addressed the Court and Jury.

The followinsg witnesses were examined:— Anthony Martin, Shirley Asbury, Thomas Turner, Henry Tomlinson, Elijah Hall, sen. Elijah Hall, jun. Mary Hepworth, Samuel Fletcher, William Shipnman, Henry Holt, William Booth, William Goodwin, Wiliam Roper, Captain Phillips, Joseph Wilkinson, John Storer, E. Rayner, and the High Sheriff.

The Court adjourned at half-past six O'clock till to-morrow.



?? The edition of the paper referred to is https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18171018/004/0003 Morning Chronicle - Saturday 18 October 1817 ; that paper cites its rationale for publishing the address as the publication of it in the previous nights edition of The Courier. https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001476/18171017/008/0002 London Courier and Evening Gazette - Friday 17 October 1817



Trial of Brandreth reprinted
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000082/18171027/002/0001?browse=true




---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18171108/010/0003
Morning Chronicle - Saturday 08 November 1817

THE STATE PRISONERS AT DERBY.

DERBY, THURSDAY, Nov. 6.

The criminals appeared in no respect materially different from what they had previously been. When the Chaplain visited Turner and Ludlam, he presented the latter with the book which we have already stated he wished to possess, in order to give it to his son-, Baxters Call to the Unconverted." Ludlam received the little volume with expressions of thankfulness, and said it was a book from which he had derived much benefit himself, and he hoped the son for whom he intended it, and others of his family, would profit no less by it than he had done. Two of his sons, who were among those recently liberated in consequence of the verdict of acquittal pronounced by the Jury, on the Attorney General declining to offer evidence against them, came in the course of the morning to take their leave. He welcomed them with affectionate tenderness, and earnestly entreated them to be good to their unfortunate mother and the children about to be left destitute by his death. Several other relations and friends afterwards called on him. While in the prison, they all assisted him with their prayers; and the energy of their appeals to their Creator and the Redeemer of man was such as to make them heard almost all over the building. When they were gone he repeated the sentiment he had expressed on a former day, upon a similar occasion, declaring the parting pang to have been less severe than he had anticipated it would prove, and he seemed consoled with the recollection of having been indulged with this new opportunity of seeing those who were most dear to him. The manner of his death seemed frequently to fill him with unspeakable horror. He was sincerely penitent, but he appeared deficient in fortitude.- By degrees his mind became more tranquillized, and he took a just view of the crime for which he was about to suffer. Attempting to raise his thoughts to Heaven in prayer that afternoon, while supplicating his Maker to pardon his numerous sins, he extended his appeal to the Throne of Mercy, by imploring the great Disposer of all Events, " to bless his native land:— to incline the King to love his people; to make him beloved by them, and to save the nation from a recurrence of those comnmotions which had disturbed the public peace, and brought him to an untimely end." He represented himself to have become very feeble since he had been in confinement; his health was certainly considerably impaired, and for some time he had appeared to be falling away. With respect to his family some erroneous reports have gone forth to the world. He has had fourteen children born to him, but of these only seven survive to mourn the ignomninious exit of their father.

Turner, in the course of this day was visited by several of his friends and relations. Like Ludlam, he was much wasted by imprisonmont and sorrow. Anxious to malte his present deplorable situation beneficial to others, he undertook to write a letter to some of his relations, which he hoped to make the vehicle of wholesome admonition to them. The effort was in vain. In vain he attempted to collect his thoughts, and to commit them to paper in such a form that they might be read with advantage by others. After repeated endeavours to complete his task, he confessed it to be too much for him, and wished his nephew to write in his place. He desired that an affectionate letter might be written, one that would be read with pleasure by those for whom he designed it when he should be no more; and to such letter he expressed a wish to affix his signature. A letter was accordingly written, but as no extraordinary interest can attach to such a performance, however moral and religious, not more immediately connected with those who are the subject of this article, we have thought it unnecessary to procure a copy. He did not explicitly confess his offence against his country as Ludlam had done, but he did not hesitate to admit that his conduct had been wrong.

Brandreth on this day exhibited a remarkable instance of fortitude. Few men in such circumstances have ever appeared so perfectly composed. There was nothng of levity, or of vivacity in his conduct, to call for reproof, but he was singularly tranquil, and he continued unshaken to the last. The Chaplain was astonished to find him thus serene. In his experience, he had never met with a man about to lay down his life for offences so aggravated, and under circumstances so peculiarly terrific, who could appear so little distressed, and whose mind was so completely made up to meet death without dismay. In conversing with the prisoner, he expressed surprise at finding him thus. Brandreth replied, that lie felt himself sustained beyond expectation. He declared he had no fear, and did not at all shrink from the idea of mounting the scaffold. Upon this Mr. Pickering said, " he was apprehensive that that which made him so much at his ease, was a constitutional firmness of nerve, and not a fortitude springing from a study of the truth, and experience of the consolations of religion." The convict rejoined, that if he were capable of judging of his own case, he could not hesitate to say that the Reverend Gentleman was mistaken. All he had read of the Scriptures, and all he had heard in illustration of them, induced him to believe that he had a saving faith in him, and that the tranquillity of his deportment, which had been made the subject of remark, resulted from that faith, and not from any peculiarity of Constitution! The Chaplain then changing the subject of conversation, wished to obtain from him some particulars of his past life. All inquiries of this nature, however, he still endeavoured to elude. On their being pressed on him more closely, and the propriety of his satisfying them being enforced by the remark that it might be highly beneficial to others, to know by what means he had been led from the paths of honesty and peace, to engage in those courses for which he was about to suffer, he repeated it was his determination to say no more than he had already said on these topics. He refused even to tell who and what his parents had been. Any thing that might transpire respecting his former situation in life must be obtained fromn his wife; he would communicate nothing; and he hoped such questions would not be put to him again ! The Minister next endeavoured to impress him with a due sense of the guilt he had incurred in shedding the blood of a fellow creature. On this subject at least, he suggested, a full confession ought to be made. Brandreth was here as impenetrable as ever. He had endeavoured to make his peace with God, and he did not see that it was necessary to make any statement for the satisfaction of man. To him it appeared this was a question wholly between the Almighty and his own soul, and now that he was about to be snatched from earth, he cherished a confident hope that an arm of vengeance would not be interposed between him and Heaven. He repeated the declaration that he had no reluctance to mount the scaffold, and felt no dread of the morrow ! In the evening, when he was again visited by the Chaplain, his manner and his language were the same, and no trace of emotion or of fear could be discovered. During his confinement he once said, that but for Mr. Oliver he should never have been there.- He was pressed to explain these words, but refused to do so, and he never repeated the assertion, nor even mentioned the name of Mr. Oliver again.

DERBY, Nov. 7.

EXECUTION OF BRANDRETH, TURNER, AND LUDLAM.

At ten o'clock in the morning a detachment of dragoons had been marched to Nun's Green, the street in which the prison stands. The duty assigned to them was to keep the carriages from passing that way till after the execution. During the execution, they were specially charged to keep at a distance, as the civil power was considered fully equal to the important business of the day. The drop was enclosed by special constables, and in the rear of these the javelin men, on horseback, took their station. Several constables were placed in different situations near the prison, for the purpose of checking any disurder that might arise, but not the smallest apprehension of an attempt at a rescue was for a moment entertained.

Mr. Pickering visited the prisoners according to his custom, but came sooner than usual on this the last day of their mortal existence. Having visited Turner and Ludlam, and found them much in the same frame of mind as on the preceding evening. He then went to Brandreth. Here no change was to be observed. He had risen as usual, and smoked his pipe. His conduct was remarkably calm, but his calmness was rather that of insensibility than that of true fortitude. We know not whether any of his friends had supplied him with liquor, but certainly at times his manner of speaking much resembled that of a man in a state of intoxication.

The night of Thursday was passed by Ludlam and Turner in prayer and other devout exercises. They retired to bed but did not sleep. Early in the morning they sung a psalm, and endeavoured to improve the little time that remained t them. Brandreth went to rest as usual, but in the morning early he was also employed it the same way. He afterwards occupied himself in writing a letter to his wife. He had on the preceding day announced his intention to do this.

Several letters were written yesterday by, or rather for Turner. We have already mentioned that he had on the preceding day wished sonmething of the kind to be done. The first was addressed to his brother and sister. He was heard to say he hoped they would be composed, and not grieve for their departed brother. He described himself to he quite resigned to his fate, and ready to meet the Almighty Judge of both quick and dead, before whom he hoped to stand acquitted of all sins done in the body. He praised the Lord for the change he felt in his mind, and exhorted those whom he addressed himself, to lose no time in seeking divine grace and salvation through Jesus Christ; and concluded, imploring for them the blessisig of God Almighty. His name was signed to this letter, and at the bottom, by way of Postscript, the following words were added :—

" Dear Brother and Sister, when this comes to you I shall he no more. I desire well-"

Another addressed to his dear frather, mother, brothers, sisters, and all his relations, was couched in simiilar terms, and written in the same hand. Like the former, it described the prisoner to have " felt a spring of happiness in his breast from prayer and repentance since his conviction, which he had never known before." To this was subjoined the following addition in his own hand :—

" Dear Father and Mother, when you receive this, I shall be no more. So a du Fair well, God Bless you all.  
"November the 7, 1817. WILLIAM TURNER"

TO DO 

No man could be more earnest in his devotions than the unfotunate Ludlam. li-e never commencedofnihda el tvihou risig is houht ?? inpryer. White the Char- lai wa yeteray ornng ithlirndrthlie 1Prs'ed with Turnr, ad inso adfbi a vicethatmanyoflis wvordi could be hardin ha assgesof he risn. omeof the expressions he ise wrs s ollws-" ) hritlook down its wercy upon us! Forgive us our sins, 0 blessed Lamb ! Hear our sup- plic"ti"us we beseech thee, and guide our souls through the Val- le ftie slsadow of death into the paradise of God. Grant this, 0God 'v'ipoe thee, through the merits of thy Son, our Lord Jesus.and Saviour, Jesus Christ." Turner responded to vi- rious$ passages in the prys o Ludlani, who possessed a great nlow ot words, and bth were evidently animnatel with the same feeling of penitence,-the sa,,e zealous devotion,- andI, in sosie ineeasurvi consoled by the anehpsosalvation and everlastinig glory. After Mr. Picketing had left Birandretli, but a few aaittstes elapsed before. Turner and Ludlam were brought front their room, to be conducted to the Chapel. 'Airner lolted dread-1 folly agitated. Ludlam was more composed. On entering the yard George Wleightman canse up and shook hands with Turner.t He did the same by Ludlans, who followed a few paces behind, Weighenman was much affected, but did not sjteak further than to utter a short symipathizingejaculationi. Turner and Ludlam then ascended the steps leading to the Chapel. Brandreth appeared the next moment walking up thegyrdl with his usial indifference.t Ile followed the others into -he Chapel, where, after the usualI service, the sacrament was administered. All the other prisoners attended, but none of them partook of the sacransent Iatt the three who were about to suffer. Ludlam had been particularly anxious to be admitted to this solemnity, and be seemed considerably refreshed by it when it had been administered sot hit.a The others mtanifested proper feelings of self-hunmiliation. While the three suffierers were in the Chapel, much distress appeared in the countenances and manner of their late cons- panlone in guilt, who were the spectators of the preparations for the execution. Edward Turner, brother to William, was so violently affected, that it was found necessary to remove him from the yard, lest his cries and groans should interfere with the devotions of those who were so soon to lay down their lives. t Mlanchester Turner was in tears, and old Bacon, whom they sometuues nansed as the canoe of their being in their then situa- f tion, seemed disposed toke ut of sight as istecis as possible. The prisoners were expected to leave the Chapel at about a quarter before twelve, They, however, still remained there, when Mr. Simpson, else Under-Sheriff, arrived to demnand their bodies, which he did in the following terms, addressing Itinself to Mr. Eaton, the jailor: C " In the name of else Higlh-Sheriff for the county of Derby, as Isis Under-Sheriff, I command you to bring forth upon else Scaffold, the bod ies of Jeremiah Brabdreth, William Turner, and Isaac Ludlam, the elder, that their several san-t tenets of death, for the High Treasons of which they have been convicteda,ssy bc5 executed forthwith." To this the usual answer of forns was given. Mr. Simpson passed into the prison, and an intimation was given to the Chaplain that he waited. Mr. Banmford, the smoith, atrtunded to knock off the ironst which the prisonei's had worn sitice conviction, and to pat ont those in which they were to die; the latter ware precisely simi-t lea to the former, save titat they lied locks on them, by means of which they could easily he removed when the last struggle shouldr be over I~ornarly itwts cutomaryin hi county to give the prisoners te coic ?? inor out of irons, bitt of lateyeat thse ecested aveinvaiaby saffered with their C fettrs n, s te aearig o thm i suposed to actelerate the I wor ofdeah, nd o trmiatether sfferingg -more speedily thanwoud oiserisebe he cst. The only reason for knock-: hing off one set ofirons, ond pttig onl sntir is that which we have alluded Io Those wor at th execto cast easily be removed by means of a key; tlse otlherscol ntbe -knocked off when the men were dead. When theyll had thus enmiacdb radehstdresscd his~fellnoV tsuffelrer, while Ludlam was undergoing the firit part of Isis sentence, that of being drawn on a hurdle--"' Well'he said, "1we shall now soon be above the alty, whlere there will be joy and glory for ever and ever in the presence of Jesus Christ." " Yea,' Turner replied with enthesiasna, "there will be no sorrow there, all will be joy and felicity." The Chaplain encouraged these hopes, and assisted thenm with other consoling reflections, till Ludlam was brought to the door of the passage. On entering from else yard he passed Branndretll and '1'siner, and did not take any part in the conversation just described, and which still continued. Branudretlh decla.red lise was quite ready to dile, he-. did not feel any dreisd of it at all. 'Ludidm having passed them praying to hinaself, was otet by Mr. Eaton, the galoler's brother, who lie thought had intended ci, atop hint. lie, upon this, said-" I suppose.I aita takesa turn or twohbert, bup and down the passage ;" and to this no objection was made; hot he had passed hut, once up, when, they were sunmmoned to the scaffold. When their irons were knocked off, and t. second set put on, they sat down for a short time in the cell In which this operation had been perforosed. They repeatedly exclaimed, "Glory to God!" and invoked mercy fromn on high. This executioner and his man were here introduced to pinion them. To the door of this place the sledge. had ps'eviosisly been brought, it was turned the flat side utpwards, and the hon~e was now attached to it. Brandreth came into the yard before the others, and issanediately seated, or rather-tuntbled, himself on it, at the sante tine calling out, "1 You niust hold ty hand, or I I shall fall off." I-ie was held on each band, and immediately dragged round the yard. As he passed lie nodded to the, other pribnners, in the yard, and ?? be with you all, amd vish nte too!l" Hle passed from the h'ardle into else passage- of the, prison, where, in a few mu- neiets, he was joli ed by Turner ; who, on being asked howv he felt himself, replied witb some vivacity-" Why, I feel better I than I could expect; I feel as if I should be happy." Brandreth took Turner by the hand, and they kissed each other. They passed along the passage leading towards that part of the prison in which Ludlam and Turner had been latterly confined, and were now placed in a row at else foot of the ladder, by which they were to be conducted to the plattorna. Here thecy saw the bench said block, on which the last part of the sentence was to be performed, and had ass imperfect view of the machine on which they were first to suffer. After a momentary pause, Mr. Pickering passed up the ladder with Brandreth, preceded. by else executioner and his assistasit. I Osace brought on the scaffold,' dispatcci is mercy to the crimi- nal. That the sufferers-might yesterday be dismissed from life with tlue greatest possible expedition, after they weie exposed to theg gze of the multitude, it was ordered that the three nooses should be formed, and the ends of the ropes tied to the suspending beam, so that when the sufferers were led forth nothing might remain ti' be done- but- pass each rope over the head of the iiaiilfor whom it was destined, t~ oll dow S.1n the caps, and let the drop fall. Osi mounting the scaffold, Brandreth exclaimed, "God be with you all and bird Castlereagh." 'Ihae cord by which he was to be suspeosled Nas tied too high; asid on accouost of his shortness it became netessasry to loiosen it at tho top to make it reach Isima. When his bread wais passed through it, and the kisot placed behinid the keft ear, the rope' being at tels same titne drawn nmoderately - t~iht, the word was givsia fur William learner to be bfob psi; he asensded tise ladder with a taulusriuig step, -and ?? reaching the platforml .called out with 'in ass of. wildness, "1 This is aill Oliver' and else Government, the Lord.have mercy on my soul.".- The halter was thess placed about his neck, and lie thesa joined with the llinister in prayer. Th'riethiaf siifferc.r, Isaac Lud- lam, was now brosight up thin ladder, he prayed, as he passed up, and while the rope was being placed about his neck, raised his voice in humble supplication to Heaven, in the following terms:-" O Lord, forgive my sins, and receive my soul, andlgrant that I may naeet all this great concourse of pe pie in Heaven. Bless the King of this natiuss, bless the Peol bless all the people high and lowv, rich mind poor, bosund andfre yea, bless all, froth the King upon his throne, down to h meanest subject so the realm, and may this awful dispensation be made ablessing to thousands audteitsof thousands. O Lord, receive my spirit " he Chaplain asked if lie would listen to the praer hic hewasproceeding to read to Brandretis, and .l'me, bt udlss semed not to-hear him, and coittisued to repet hs frmeryrasr.After a few moments, perceiving the Chaplain vas e~sdnghe stopped, and joined the others in their respases. henthe Minister had ceased to read, the thre culritsioind with him inl repeatuing the Lord'sI Prayr; fte w~clsthe Rimversnd Gentleman took his leave. The executioners put the caps on ?? heads of tie unhiapp mets, and pule thmoe their faces. Each of them exclaimed at this moet "It thy hands, O God, I committ my spirit." They cotnu 1 toclln their Creator' and Redeemer for mercy; and I. Ludlam was once more giving uter c anc -n the -la par of the ps'avr above inserted, when, at 25 t isico eternity. Braridretla was scarcely convulsed cur a nsomntcs; Turner moveds bitt little; ludlam struggled for several minutes after his two fellow sufferers were motionless. Notwithstaniding thes resolution conie to, to cut down the sbodies~so soon as life should be extinct, they were permitted to hang for snore than half etc hosur. ft Wag note quite half ipast twelve when they came onI the s_-affoldi-thiY "'ere launche~d into eternity at twenit y-fivc ininutets lle-Il- (lie, and it was some neinutas sifter ore. before any thing more was done. Two sacks of saw-dust had been placed at the ??? hack part of tIcL d rop. Thie phatoe; ccc ax nosy rais'ed, anid ithe Saw- duet s tressed over it. Before the drop wves again'pust L-p, stc rags ihad been tied to the legs of the &Ae tesa.cn and by these they were lashed up to thle bai risabtes round the platfoi n. '1Ilie benchx and Molck wer~e then lssrovght upI, ai seers the two axes, two sharp knivee, -and -e haetlo to reenive tise h-eads. Tlhree coffin~s, on whlich were el alkied the narrcs of lirandreth, Turner, and Ludlam were neat lifted out. The body of Brandreth was then cut down and laid on the bench. The rate?? was removed frost the head, and the neck hav.. lug brett presqaed clos, otc the bloek, at 25 minutes nicer onie the ereccutioner etruckethe blow. 'chi e ita nedtces it really wax, and agroan of d's'pprobation and lore wnthe cotnsilquence. Thie1assistant, however, wiath one of thcc knives, its- stanltly conipletedw,.hat hadrnutbeen teccconpli ,lied -Yisychace.' 'Tie hlead fellintie besket,a-nd thielisnp~niacitsw-ing itlby the hair;lceiciI up tfegicastly couottieianreof thin Nstt'nigliso,,' Capt:tin to th~e vies ot the nesttitude. I-le proceeoed with it to ithe left, to tlse riglet, and to the front of the scaffold, bearing thcs trunkleqs hull in hie Icacid, and exclainming, at each placce, " Behold the heads of the .traitor Jeremiahl hrandrett." lihe Iswoad a.t tlen carefull, dlepo- Tic bdy axthe pace o it cd Cteheds of Turner-and Ind- part of te eecct~otcdidnet ccup care titan tea niniitei55 the wole iteisied ii enhoer Whe i cirst head wvas held tip. settene of the wenmen iii the crowd ran sway in, :klarniand dienays from the-disnial spectacle. Sontehisses land groana wets-r leat'd, an hese unusual sounds added to tics terrr fteeanhi Previously begunt to retreat. The panic agreedl like lightning, and a confuisedi idea that the dragoons were aboutr to cheage usc,: Populace, in consequence of the i~sistnoclat iced e~cane therest- causead tics imnmense crowd asseenbled in. frlont Of the prison t recite ill all directiotes in tcc citosot conen~ration. 1'he alarmi was of course groacedless, aced we have not hesrsl Cf auty acci- flee bodies wera yeeteruday to be interred at oduel: in St. Wee- lairgltsChurclt-yard. Freent the ?? Itny ivotish be re- moe till evetincg to a place at tice bacck of else prison, called the Jragrant I-louse. Ate execution for Iligh Treason, at least for teat description of High Treason, whi'li coisprehentla at levvitg6 sa'agia ithe Kiceg, is rare, ithanle God, ice every part of 'tlee British em- pire, bct isa Derbyshire, till tics presesit occasion, no ut ch eventI had Iceect known. The annals of' cite, counity presetit no i. statnce of the kind. Derbvsihire has, itrtleed, produced traitors, elcoan lives have Iceen forfeited tn offended justice. Nuie vvare foulnd ice else neeccrable yesr 1745,- bet the 1carties b-clog taken and tried elsewhere, the place to ?? yla t rhecl aeoged was spared the exhibitione of a. scene. like theat which it is roloa our naelancholy ditty tte describe, andle which, Partly fresta else cit- cunscntance above referred to, bitt :caere frona the reculisr fea- tures of thcs case, has excited in that part of the county, at least, a sensation indescribably strong, aced (lik eticat avlhichi has caused it) Wholly without precedent. TIcs! appara,,tis Istdssi ac all ordinary oeccssiotit, tsocigl 'called the new dra, is lee truth on the principle of tlee old drop, which, at ewate, feast acipplanted ties Practice of execacing criceanals frome a cart. It is net brou'gst ou~t oat valteelt, like the macheine seen so frequetitly in front ocf the Dcbltor's door !ie the Old Bai- lebitt takes ciii to pieces, aced is kept in at lloikldig ast the lcack ofthe prison. '-opt tegeht sgcsally thes work of miany hours.' In order effectually to guard sigainst shle siftul busittess of the day being prictracted considecaxlty beyocsd tee cgisia time of execution, it became necessary that the icest employed to erect else gallows, should conimcence ticeir laleours btefore day-light.; At a very catchy houcr yesterday notrraing, they ac:ordingly ectereed ullecit their task, and leaitenig rececovedt ties parts of cthe drop from ithe places where 01We ai's d!eps- eited, to the fatal. spot eoa wvhicht the culprits are destined to expiate ticeir treexoics, tcey Protceeded to arrange atcd unite Cthe several parts under the superintesedence ef Mr. Fitutax, sthe 'rown Joineer, double the cesual scumber of heelds were emnploved. During the whole of the scoriting nuinerous spectastors wecre at- tracted to witness ties progresa of else workmen ha ilce business they had taken upon themselves to perform. Between caitc'and ten o'cleck their libours approacliedclteiri terosication, and tics whole of the apparatus appeared in so conaplete a state of readi- ness that the usetencee pronouseced againstclan culpcrits maaightc have eseta carried into effiect almost at a cseoccent's notice. The l-ast enas wvho suffered. in this'town, cysts fouc'r persons convicted of firing ehe corn-ricks and stacks on Colonel I lalceic's prenisees, near Soutis Wingfield. Attics time tdccc tics priseerse were brought out to die,- ice weather happened so lbe very nol- favbsirahle, and else rain felt in torrents while th ey Were asxcrccd log tics platfornm, and during the close clcat wvus ccscascncd in ryiiag theni, up atid in aditisting tttcs fatal knttt, so as to enietere its ?? cthe critiiinitl irtle ithe least possible: delhy. In, Derby, itie in nie-st country 0lirec. it h- -ci been cusetomary' for cthe- sulferers wisslly to fictisic their tie- votiona withita the prisoct walls, acsd they cave exeuc permitted to remain on the scaffold for a caaulc lonazer tints chats Iis-usually gesanted to person~s lit thei~r dreadful siituatiesa ice Let:- don. On ?? occasion referred to, ~wicec tics wretched maen felt the raise fast descending, tiesy, with a strange society ito avsida a~ slight inconvenience, of which, at sucha a naotsectt, it couldi hardly have been expected they would be at all ctanecottos, cn- deverd to shelter themnsclves suciter tico ucebrella of tite Alil. oldter who wyes pratying with them, acid tinder dice projeccting roof of tice prison; Whieli titus -waitineg, as it Nvere, for the shower to subside, one or snore of them aveto engaged itt conver- cation witls seine ofcthe crowd who were tickea chuia, acid the de- .coruem anti soleninicylof tis ,-cene wax broken iii uopt in amanaiter nec at all to be desired. Thesy had previously declared, that if they were jfstt to death for the offence Proved against teem, lcut which ctheydenied to tics last, that they would casue Col. Haclto's ciame to be called in quesetison from one sttd of tics cocitary to cthe other. 'riey endeavous'ed to neake goad chitri words. T he usucal ceremonies being concluded, the Chaplain was about to retire, wieso they requested tn he indiciged wviths permissioin to shag ate additienal psalnm. This request was complied waitht, and the psalma endted, instead of resiisiang themselves wvith. decency to their fate, they advanced to cite front of the scaffold, and addressed the crowd in very strocig lactguage, declutring they were about to be murderetd, and that they had only been brought there by a prosecutor and witnesses who had perjured themselves. Isaac Ludiane lied been muds in the habit of visiting sail of praying -wvtit Broawn, one of the mere Who acted the p art above described. It is not knowvo that tels coutrse hie decided upon taking, was either sttggested or eeoc- tioned by Ludlain, but to gsuard against a repetition of suc conduct was thought proper, especially on an occasion like the present, when addresses to the Psopulatce like those which we have been describing, mnigit xcaie at more date- gerous sensation titan could be produced at any ordinary execution. With these impressions oct tiseir msinds, those on weonm the duty of carrying the sentences into effect devolved, were naturally anxious for arrsaagenleitt tlicat would Pre- venit the recurrenece of such conduct. No way appearesi so well calclulated to effect this as to intinaute to the sufferers tisat their religious exercises musts take tip little tiose wisest tisey came on the scaffold, It was, therefore, resolved to adotap this course, cud to instruct the execcctioner to drawv tics caps over the eyes of the sufferers, immediately after tics noose sicticld be adjusted whirls care wee taken to provide should be doate witic tics least poseible loss of timec, after they seade thceir appearance an the In consequence of ties determination thus cents to, ?sMr. Pick- stug, when he visited thena on 'Tiursday norsning, inteicaited to en radreth, Tutrier, acid Litdlatt, tlcat if they Isac a desire In sing any particular pacina or hyccan, the 1tropmer etnae fsr doitcg an would be when Cthey avers ine the Chapel, or, ait all eseisis, leeferc they wvent out. They avers t urther inforotei, that city etonfee- sieon, declaration, or stattsment, avicticl. they osilglt wisht tic leave behind thenm, they would Icave an opportunity of' maeicig weithin the ail; bu thy oss ot epec Colt pericitted to address thepoplac frns he cafald l'cistiteilge ce did coat mate-rialy ffictan ofthcne Noon ofthist seaniad to hcave forcei ny ntcaie ofsaaks-g aapceiand the tiew arrange'- It wl ocur s ou recdersclea ds is ithe first excutitton cleat lisa taken take place sinces the law gaitnst H-ighs 'reasoti was altered, so Cet use offeitders shoudbe senat-eied to b tc " hangeti by the steel till dead" instead of being"1 haaesti by tic,: neck, u ittl dead." Trhe case of Col. Despard, tliervft,re, wvho suffered under cite ancient sentence of the saw, wves not ecc" actly the same astliecof Brendretlei and itisaccomp~ictes. Despard, ancti Cleese Who suffered .with him, aver-easiptsp~ettdtoi-f25 mitiutes. Seine daub: at first exitted, whether in this case, as the Patties were sentenced en hang till dead, a longer tinee ougll tact to lae allowed than wax considered to satisfy 'the lawy under oitler tic- cumstances, thougic life v'as certainly quite extistet, tWistc) tit~b to whose executioti we have referred we~re taken down frone thcs gallucWs. It was not proalosed, howeveei',to let them havng nmet- Clhxi' haclf an hoer, bitt upon furthcet Considerationt, acs it was thought it -would be weve1 that that cite Whole of tics painftil Cers- mony should finisis withiti the liscr, it vwasj udged bettor tlest tice attendance of it otedical masth sisocid be proctired to r-epotcs whlen lthey were dead, atud on this hieing annotunecedi, Mr. Sipscioni, the Under Shieriff, deciedes tlsat the remaitider sif tics ssittenceshastttd he forthwith executed upont them. Sette aspprelietisions were entertained titat Ctsc etecutioner, Unasccostccetedl Mi the siofi the axe, avotld tint porforin ithe last partof isis duty %vlith appropriate dexterity. Oicc ties day pre- vious to the uxacuctioct, lie went tc tices anaici for cbe pairpose of examnairtg sthe aces IHe tried one of them on the trunk of a tree, but did itc htantdle it so well as cosl'l bet wisled. Fi-l swas .ivitc 1c hecrful. before lie strcsck tellw c the cislek well bent to the blocic, aced at tihe samesa. ecme can- cloned against hitting too near the shoulder, whecre lice awouldl encouniter at hard bone, which osigst tetike a repseition of ?? stroke necessary. fie promiseti to attenid to these in- habit of using lthe axe and pick-axe, Ie was confiidetnt hie slhould not fail. A fear still remained, that whclen the monmewit came he would feel intimidated. II s I i i I I 


---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000082/18171110/005/0002?browse=true
Morning Chronicle - Monday 10 November 1817

In this, and we believe, every other Christian Country, peculiar importance has with. reason been generally attached to the last words of men conscious of approaching dissolution. It is on this principle that the Law of England views with such peculiar sanctity any declaration which a man who falls by the hand of another, and who knows that he is dying, may make with respect to the circumstances that led to his death. It requires no slight evidence to persuade us, that on such an awful occasion any motives can be sufficiently powerful to induce a human being to plunge into eternity with the language of falsehood in his mouth. If this presumption of veracity is entertained, even in cases where the irritation produced by recent violence has hardly had time to subside, how much more ought it to be entertained in cases where the mind has been sometime settled in a calm contemplation of eternity? The approach of death is calculated to extort the truth even from the most irreligious. Supposing a man to die in the certain belief, that with this world his existence closes, and that he has no retribution to dread beyond the grave, a certainty of belief which, if the truth could be known, has, we suspect, been shared by very few indeed, at the awful hour which closes for ever all his mortal prospects, few motives can be supposed strong enough to induce him to practice delusion on his fellow creatures. But when the heart is. thoroughly imbued with the truths of religion—when a man, dies in the firm conviction that he is to appear in the presence of an Omniscient Judge— when his soul is wrapped up in the contemplation of its future being, what earthly motives can be supposed sufficiently powerful to induce him to draw down on himself the certainty of divine vengeance, and to depart with conscious falsehood on his lips.

That the unfortunate men who suffered the sentence of the law at Derby, on Friday last, were sincerely religious, has, we believe, been generally admitted, and, indeed, from all the accounts of their conduct subsequent to their sentence, must be evident to every unprejudiced mind. In all that they did, in every thing which fell from them, in all that they wrote to those, whom they held most dear, an intense feeling of religion was not to be mistaken. On Thursday TURNER and LUDLAM, it is said, " prayed together with a an earnestness and a fervour that were quite overpowering."—On Friday morning the same men " looked shockingly wan and spiritless. They had watched the whole night in prayer and psalm-singing. At nine the Chaplain visited. them, and assisted them in their devotions. They afterwards continued aloud till the moment of immediate preparation arrived."-BRANDRETH, though less agitated and less fervent in his devotion to outward appearance, seems to have been also sincerely religious.

The last words of men so strongly under the influence of religion, are intitled to peculiar regard; and we have not a doubt that their dyinrg declarations with respect to their instigators, have produced the strongest impression throughout the whole country. With all the care and anxiety which has been displayed in so extraordipary a manner since the final condemnation, still it has transpired, that BRANDRETH latterly was heard occasionally to mutter, " OLIVER: has brought me to this." " But for OLIVER I should not have been here." But what was of more consequence still, TURNER, *while the executioner was putting the rope'round his neck*, exclaimed loudly and distinctly, " This is all OLIVER and the Government." It is said, " *the Chaplain at this mognent came in front of these two* (BRANDRETH and TURNER) *and prevented any further observations*." This Chaplain, who is reported to have manifested great zeal on this subject before the day of the execution, seems to have been no less on the alert on that awful occasion.

Knowing the effect which these dying declarations could not fail to produce on all dispassionate minds, the emissaries of Government have been endeavouring to weaken it, by attempts which, we are persuaded, must be viewed with universal disgust, if not execration. In the report of these emissaries, published in *The Courier* of Saturday last, an endeavour is made to call in question the sincerity of the religion of the prisoner whose last words, on the scaffold, pointed to OLIVER as the cause of his fall. TURNER and LUDLAM, it is said, " are both Dissenters; but we all along questioned the sincerity of TURNER'S prayers, *although he seemed to join devoutly with Ludlam, and addressed Heaven in the loudest and most impassioned strains*."- Questioned the sincerity of his prayers ! Why were their sincerity questioned? An imputation of this kind ought to be made on no slight proof. Do we not every day see the most wicked and hardened criminals, wretches without instructors, and rendered callous by a life of continued transgression, still clinging with ardour to religion when bereft of all worldly hope? Why then are we to suppose that these men,educated in a knowledge of the truths of religion, for which they ever showed a reverence, and whose conduct, with one exception, has we believe been hitherto unexceptionable, should now in the hour of need withdraw themselves from all its consolations? Why should we suppose the hypocrisy of these poor men so monstrous as to induce them to pass their days and nights in prayers and supplications, of which their hearts knew the insincerity ? We can easily conceive that the dying declarations of these men, after all the precautions taken to prevent them, must have occasioned no small degree of alarm in certain quarters; but we could hardly have conceived that this alarm should have so far blinded those by whom it was felt, as to induce them to have recourse to the means to which we have alluded. The condition of mind to which the fervent devotion of the Derby prisoners could suggest doubts and suspicions, is hardly to be envied, however useful it may be to its possessor. Such a degree of scepticism argues a state of internal feeling, which reflection at least might have suggested the propriety of hiding from the world.

We will not stop to notice several other particulars, which have been derived from the same source, and which have been published with the same view. We have a better opinion of the public than to suppose that any observation of ours is necessary to guide their judgement with respect to artifices so obvious, and yet so revolting. We have only to add, that the account of the proceedings at the execution was not from our owvn Correspondent, and that it reached us at a late hour on the morning after the Paper had gone to Press.


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18171209/006/0002
Morning Chronicle - Tuesday 09 December 1817

OLIVER AND THE DERBY CONSPIRATORS. (Frow the Leicester Chronicle of Saturday, Dec. 6.) ti 2Th Editor of the Leicester Journal in his paper tlt of yesterday, has appropria...