
Reports that I've transcribed but that appear to be duplicates...


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002593/18111217/008/0003
General Evening Post - Tuesday 17 December 1811


NOTTINGHAM, Dec. 13.—We had flattered ourselves that the publication of the Resolutions agreed to at a Meeting of the Hosiers and Lace Manufacturers would have cased `(sic)` the frame-breakers to suspend their destructive proceedings throughout the county; but though no act of violence has occurred in this town for the last ten days, they have not ceased elsewhere. At Bulwell and Arnold, ten frames were broken on Saturday and Sunday, and two at Buston Joyce on Wednesday night. At the latter place, we are informed, that a frame was broken yesterday, and that the depredators escaped, though there were parties both of horse and foot soldiers in the village.

THREE O'CLOCK, P.M.—After flattering ourselves with the hopes of approaching tranquility, it is doubly painful to record new acts of aggression, and these, too, of the most desperate kind. Two stacks, one of straw and the other of corn, belonging to Mr. Pepper, flour-seller, in this town, were last night set fire to at Basford; the former was entirely consumed; and of the latter only a small part was saved. At this moment an extraordinary meeting is sitting at the Shire Hall, consisting of the Duke of Norfolk, (Lord Lieutenant of the County), Viscount Newark, Sir J.B. Warren, Sir T.W. White, and the Magistrates, to take into consideration the alarming and destructive state of the county, to receive information, and to endeavour to ascertain the means by which the rioters support themselves in the exercise of their lawless authority.

Committed on Wednesday the 11th inst. for trial at the Assizes, by Edward Swann and Wright Coldham, Gentlemen, Aldermen, John Ingham, a workman employed by Mr. William Nunn, lace-Manufacturer, upon the oaths of Rupert Renshaw and others, with feloniously writing and sending a letter, signed with a fictitious name, viz "Ned Ludd and Co." and directed to William Nunn and Co. Park-street, Nottingham, threatening to break and destroy the frames of the said William Nunn, and injure his person, and the person of Thomas Clarke, a person concerned in such manufacture.

And on the same day, by the same Magistrates, William Parkes, and George Shaw, upon the oath of Joseph Allen and others, for entering a dwelling-house in this town, on the 25th of November, and breaking five stocking frames, contrary to the statute.

In addition to the military force now stationed here, we understand that two troops of the Oxford Blues, commanded by Capt. Fenwick, are on their route from Reading to this town by forced marches.



https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000045/18111223/012/0004
Caledonian Mercury - Monday 23 December 1811
Nottingham Riots

Derby, Thursday, December 12th

It is with extreme regret we state, that the disturbances which have caused so much agitation in a neighbouring county, have broken out here with destructive violence: At Holbrook, Crich, Heage, and Pentridge, not fewer than between 40 and, 50 frames, of all descriptions have been broken since Saturday last. A party of these deluded men visited Pentrick [*sic*] thrice on the first night (the 1st inst.) not finding the frames they were in search of at Mr. Topham's, they departed without doing any mischief, but giving a caution to the people not to work at an under price, nor encourage *colts* among them, threatening otherwise they would return and demolish their frames. On the second visit they were pacified at finding that the prices had been raised, and contented themselves with demolishing three frames at Oakerthorpe, &c. On Saturday they returned and broke twelve frames, notwithstanding full prices having been given. Two of the lace frames belonged to Mr Topham, who not being at home on their arrival, but learning what was going forward, ran with a great presence of mind to the vicarage house, and E having obtained the key of the church, proceeded thither and began o ring the bells: on hearing which, the rioters were alarmed, and precipitately retired. They afterwards demolished several frames at Swanwick, Riddings, and Ripley. At Ilkeston about, 30 frames have been injured in the course of the week. The reason which has been circulated for, the frame breakers again visiting Pentridge, is, that one hosier had intimated his intention of fetching the whole of his frames to the village, and that the destructive visit was to deter him from so doing. Measures have been adopted to prevent arms failing into the hands of the rioters, and the Derby and Chaddetdon yeomanry cavalry have been called out. A troop of Scots Greys has also arrived from Nottingham, which is to be stationed here. The military are authorised to act in case of falling in with the rioters.

Nottingham, Friday afternoon, Dec. 13.

We had flattered ourselves that the publication of the resolution agreed to at a meeting of the hosiers and lace manufacturers would hake caused the frame-breakers to suspend their destructive proceedings throughout the county; but though no act of violence has occurred in this town for the last ten days, they have not ceased elsewhere. At Bulwell and Arnold ten frames were broken on Saturday and Sunday, and two at Buston Joyce on Wednesday night. At the latter place, we are informed, that a frame was broken yesterday, and that the depredators escaped, though there were parties both of horse and foot soldiers in the village.

Nottingham, 3 o'clock Friday afternoon.

After flattering ourselves with the hopes of approaching tranquillity, it is doubly painful to record new acts of aggression, and these too of the most desperate kind. Two stacks, one of straw and the other of corn, belonging to Mr Pepper, flower-seller in this towns were last night set fire to at Basford; the former was entirely consumed; and of the latter, only a small part was saved.— At this moment an extraordinary meeting is sitting at the shire hall, consisting of the Duke of Newcastle, (Lord Lieutenant of the county), Viscount Newark, Sir J. B. Warren, Sir T. W. White, and the Magistrates, to take into consideration the alarming and destructive state of the county, to receive informations, and to endeavour to ascertain the means by which the rioters support themselves in the exercise of their lawless authority.


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000420/18160816/017/0004
Cambridge Chronicle and Journal - Friday 16 August 1816

NOTTINGHAMSHIRE ASSIZES.

NOTTINGHAMSHIRE ASSIZES. The business of primary interest at these assizes was the trials of James Croft and James Brawfield, for arson, and *Thomas Chettle* and *Thomas Glover*, for frame-breaking and burglary. The following particulars will convey a general idea of the leading facts, as they came out evidence.

...

John Chettle and Thomas Glover, *for frame-breaking*.— The prisoners were charged with having, on the night of the 8th of June last, at the parish of Radford, in company with divers other persons, with force and arms, entered the dwelling house of Wm. Wright, and therein broke and destroyed four lace frames, the property of the said Wm. Wright, and eight other frames in the same dwelling-house. They also stood charged with burglariously entering the said dwelling-house, and stealing two pieces of lace; and likewise with having, on the same night, in company with divers other persons, with force and arms, entered the dwelling-house of Thomas Mullen, in the said parish, and maliciously and feloniously broke and destroyed therein one lace frame, belonging to the said Thomas Mullen, and six other frames in the same dwelling-house. To these several counts the prisoners pleaded not guilty.— Wm. Wright and others, in their examination before the Court, gave an account of the breaking of the frames, between twelve and one o'clock the night mentioned in the indictment, by a party of men, in disguise, who made their way into the house, chopping the door with an axe, and forcing it open. The four lace frames were in full employ. Mrs. Waynman stated the extent of the damage sustained, including the lace pieces, at £263. — Ann Wright appeared as principal witness for the prosecution. She said, that she was in bed and was alarmed the noise of some persons chopping the door open: that in her fright she "screeted out murder!" She looked out of the window and saw Chettle and Glover, whom she had known for some time; that she distinctly recognised their features and dress, by the light of the moon, and of a candle which stood in the room. She was quite certain as to their persons. That she heard Chettle say, in his own natural voice, when the men were breaking open the door, "Now you may get in;" and in going through the house, he cautioned the rest, saying to them "mind, you are forgetting your voices." The men were in the house about twenty minutes. On her cross-examination she admitted that she had told different stories about the matter, but that what she had before said was under the influence of fear.—The prisoners, in their defence, set up an *alibi*, which was supported by the testimony of a great number of witnesses. On the part of Chettle it was proved by a woman of the name Wacherley, or Waggerley, who had had children by him, that he was present with her, from 10 o'clock at night on the 8th of June, until two the next morning, in company with several other persons, who had met at a room, in Lamb's buildings, Broad Lane, in that town, to make merry on account of the return of her son, who had been just discharged from the army. J. Ash, —— Price, Frederick Wacherley, Jemima Hunt, Ann Jarvis, and another, who were of the party, corroborated this statement; which was further confirmed by Ann Dry and another, who inhabited adjoining rooms, and had seen the prisoner there at the several hours of one and two in the morning. All the witnesses agreed as to the prisoner being fresh in liquor, and that he had slept on a chair in the room from one to two hours. In addition to this, the wife of a person named Shaw, swore that she saw and spoke to Chettle, at her own door, in Back Lane, about 20 minutes past two in the morning; that he appeared quite fresh, and was going towards home, at New Radford. Witness had been washing and preparing her children's clothes, for them to go to the Sunday School in the morning, and she happened to go to the door at the moment Chettle was coming up the lane. Witness knew Ann Wright; but such was her character, that she would not believe any thing she said upon oath.— On the part of Glover, Mrs Cooper, her servant, and several other persons swore, that he was sitting in the tap-room, at the Odd Fellows' Arms public-house, New Radford, in company with four or five more, who had been partaking of a beef steak with him, from half-past nine or ten o'clock at night of the 8th of June, till two the next morning, and that they never lost sight of him.

The Learned Judge (Graham), in summing up, made some pointed remarks the nature of the evidence brought forward in favour of the prisoners; when the Jury retired, and after consulting together some time, returned a verdict of *not guilty*.

As soon as the Jury had pronounced their verdict, loud shouts of approbation were set up by the crowd assembled in and about the hall.

The trial lasted thirteen hours, and did not terminate until past two o'clock on Sunday morning.— Soon after night-fall, such was the impatience manifested by the crowd for the issue of the trial, that it was with the greatest difficulty that they were restrained from offering personal violence to the members of the Court; and insulting language was several times addressed to the Judge.

On Monday morning the prisoners were again brought up, and after a short hearing, were acquitted on the other two charges.