# Attacks on Gig Mills, 1802

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000554/17670202/007/0002
Salisbury and Winchester Journal - Monday 02 February 1767

TO DO

For preventing the Hie of Gig Wheels.

WHEREAS the Woollen Manufactory hath, for a long Series of Years, been esteemed the Staple Trade of the Nation, and by Experience hath been found the principal source of the Wealth, Grandeur, Power and Strength of this Kingdom, and to have yielded a comfortable Support to vast Numbers of the Poor, as will appear from the many Acts of Parliament, from Time to Time made, ever since the Reign of King Edward the 3d, for its Regulation, Support and Encouragement; that notwithstanding the Care of the Legislature to guard against the Evils and Abuses arising in the Art of Cloth-making, many Persons upon every Motion or Flush Trade, rush into that Manufactory, tho’ totally unacquainted therewith, not being restrained by any Law, debauches the labouring Hands, and regarding morewe their private Emolument and Advantage, than the Character and Reputation of their Cloth, cause the same to be made up in a slight, scandalous. and deceitful Manner, by employing certain Mills called Gig Mills, and other destructive Means, to the great Discredit and Disrepute of that Commodity, and no less Injury of the established Clothier; that the illicit Liberty many persons of late have taken in setting up those Gig Mills, and causing Cloth to be wrought thereat, hath been found very advantageous to the sordid and mean Clothier, and very detrimental to the Cloth, as appears by the Statute of the 5th and 6th of Edward the 6th, for the total Prohibition of them, and tend to the manifest Injury, Loss, and Impoverishment of the labouring Poor, for the Want of that Employment with held from them by the Use of such Mills, by Means whereof they are rendered lass able to support themselves and Families, especially in these distressed Times, when Scarcity of Work is joined with Dearness of Provisions, and consequently adds to the Burthen of those Parishes, the Seat of the Manufactory:

Therefore, in order to suppress those Mills called Gig Mills, so destructive in the Manufactory of Broad Cloth, in the several Counties of Wilts, Gloucester, and Somerset, it hath been resolved, that Prosecutions shall be commenced against all persons using and exercising the same against the said Statute of the 5th and 6th of Edward the 6th, after the Publication hereof. And all Persons, particularly those concerned in the different Branches of the Woollen Manufactory, are requested to transmit an Account of Offences against the said Statute, with Proof of the same, to Mr. Stokes, at Melksham, in Wilts, that Prosecutions may he had thereupon.

N. B. The penalty by the Statute is five Pounds for every Cloth wrought at such Mills.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0006049/17670814/006/0002
Exeter Flying Post - Friday 14 August 1767

Saturday last about 500 Shear Men from the clothing Towns of Somersetshire and Wiltshire, assembled together upon Cortley Heath, and went in a body to Hornisham, near Warminster, Wilts, and pulled down and destroyed a new Gig-Mill, just erected for dressing Broad Cloth, belonging to Mr. Everet of that Place; whereby one Man and Boy could do as much Work in two Hours as 30 Men could do in a Day.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000554/17680718/015/0003
Salisbury and Winchester Journal - Monday 18 July 1768

On Thursday the sessions for this county, held at Warminster, ended. ... William Fido, for destroying a gig mill, was ordered to remain in prison for 12 months, pay a fine of 20l. and give security for his good behaviour. ...

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000554/17681010/009/0003
Salisbury and Winchester Journal - Monday 10 October 1768

At the general Quarter Sessions of the Peace, which ended last Thursday at Marlborough, ... James Forest, for pulling down Mr. Everet's gig mill, is to remain till next sessions, or give bail in 100l. himself, and find two sureties in 50l. each; ...

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000219/17690119/014/0004
Bath Chronicle and Weekly Gazette - Thursday 19 January 1769

At the general quarter sessions for the county of Wilts, which ended at Salisbury on Thursday last, ... James Forrest, for pulling down Mr. Everett's gig-mill, is to remain in prison six months, to pay a fine of 20l., and find sureties in 100l. for his good behaviour for 7 years. ...

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000236/17850315/008/0003
Leeds Intelligencer - Tuesday 15 March 1785

`[Missing]` at the dressing shop of a house in this town, from a board of croppers; whose avowed object is to dictate which of their body shall be employed, and which shall not.— Perhaps at a season of fuller employment, this mandate might have enforced itself. The good of the trade seems to require that such a plan of regulations be adopted amongst the masters in this branch, as may preserve to them the power of employing what workmen they please, and of dressing their goods in what manner they please.— Gig Mills arc now in general use, except at this place; and why is the benefit of their despatch and cheapness to divert a great part of the trade from its ancient channel, without any attempt to preserve it.

"We the Leading Members of this Charatable Stock are Credably Informed that Jno Brownridge who Work'd With you the Last week was by you Turn'd of his Work for no offence and a Stranger not Belonging the Town or This Charitable Stock. we Who are the Ruling Members do Require you to Imploy the laid Jno Brownridge or you'll Incur our Displeasure: & we Do insist on you that are working at the Said Shop To Leave of work while the said Jno Brownridge be again Imploy'd or Some Person Belonging To this Charitable Stock."

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000236/17870731/008/0003
Leeds Intelligencer - Tuesday 31 July 1787

At the above Assizes `[York]` a cause came on before Lord Loughborough, in which John Robinson, of this town, in behalf of himself and other dresser, was Plaintiff, and Mr. Richard Atkinson, of Huddersfield, Defendant.— THe action was brought to recover a penalty under an old statute of the 6th of Edward VI. for using a machine for the purpose of perching and burling of cloth, then called a *gig-mill*; when it appeared, upon the clearest evidence, that the machine used by the said Mr. Atkinfon was a modern invention, for the purpose of *raising* cloth, upon a plan the most beneficial to the manufactory of this country; of course the Jury without hesitation, gave a verdict for the defendant, to the satisfaction of a crowded court.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000532/17940512/002/0001
Gloucester Journal - Monday 12 May 1794

GLOCESTERSHIRE.

WHEREAS the CLOTH-WORKERS of the county of Glocester have entered into a VOLUNTARY SUBSCRIPTION, in order to defray the necessary expences attendant upon an application to Parliament, for the remedy of certain grievances, occasioned by the use of GIG-MILLS (by act of Parliament prohibited), of which there is just reason of complaint, and which cannot possibly be effected at the costs of a few individuals: And have also, at a meeting, appointed certain persons a Committee to receive subscriptions for that purpose, and to appoint a Solicitor to manage and conduct such application as aforesaid; AND WHEREAS some of the Clothiers of the said county, in order, as it is presumed, to prevent and set aside such application from taking place, did, at a meeting held at the Fleece Inn, in the parish of Rodborough, in the said county, on Monday the 14th day of April last,

RESOLVE, "That if the Cloth-workers, appointed as the Committee for managing such proceedings as aforesaid, did not immediately withdraw, and entirely forego, such their intentions of applying to Parliament, they should be forthwith dismissed from their employ, and not be admitted to work for any Clothier in their connection; AND FURTHER, That if all the other Cloth-workers, which are to the amount of 500 and upwards, did continue to subscribe, they (the Clothiers) would take care that the Cloth-workers should not earn more than the sum of 7s. per week;" AND WHEREAS, in consequence of the above Resolution, they have actually discharged a considerable number of persons, by reason of their refusing to conform themselves agreeably to the resolutions of such Clothiers, by not abandoning their intentions as aforesaid; AND WHEREAS, at a Meeting of the said Committee of Cloth-workers, held at the house of Thomas Buckingham, known by the sign of the Bear-Inn, on Rodborough Common, on Thursday the 17th day of April last, it was unanimously agreed, and thought proper, in order to do away any mistaken prejudice which the Public may entertain of the proceedings of the Cloth-Workers, and which some of the Clothiers have been endeavouring to misrepresent, to notify by Public Advertisement — That labouring at this time under such grievances (by reason of the use of the said Gig-Mills, which are prohibited as before-mentioned, and to restrain the use thereof to certain kinds and qualities of Cloth, which cannot be injured thereby), the Cloth-Workers have been advised, by eminent Counsel, not to avail themselves of the right given by the said act, of suing for the penalties incurred; but that the more fair and candid manner of proceeding, would be, to lay the same before Parliament, in order that it may be properly considered and redressed: To defray the expences, therefore, of such a measure, which may prove too heavy for a few poor men to support, a Voluntary Subscription was opened, and is still continued.

With this view, a petition now lies ready at the Office of Mr. Clarke, Attorney at Law, in Stroud, to receive the signatures of such persons as are inclined to co-operate in the application to Parliament, for the regulation of these Gig-Mills.

This petition will shortly be presented to the Honourable House of Commons, and those who chuse to sign the same, are requested to attend without delay.

By order of the Meeting,  
HENRY CLARKE,  
Solicitor for the Cloth-Workers.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000532/17940526/059/0002
Gloucester Journal - Monday 26 May 1794

AT a Meeting of the Cloth-Workers residing in the City of London and Suburbs thereof, held at the Bell, in Basinghall-street, on Saturday the 17th day of May inst. in order to consider of the present Application to Parliament respecting the improper use of Gigg-Mills, in the working up of Fine Cloth, (pursuant to public advertisement, for that purpose) a Copy of the Petition presented to the Honourable House of Commons on Friday last, from the Cloth-Workers of the County of Gloucester, praying for a regulation of the said Gigg-Mills, (in order to limit and confine them to the working up of Coarse Cloth only) being read,

*It was Resolved unanimously,*

THAT the conduct and proceedings of the Cloth-Workers of the County of Glocester, in applying to Parliament for the purposes aforesaid, merit our approbation, inasmuch as it may be the means of benefiting the public at large, by rendering the drapery of the Cloth more substantial and durable — for where Gig-Mills are used in working up Cloths of superior quality (which ought to be done by hand) the texture or ground of such Fine Cloth is materially injured thereby.

THAT, in order to co-operate and assist in so laudable an undertaking, a Subscription be immediately opened, towards defraying the expences attendant upon such application to Parliament as aforesaid.

THAT Mr. Samuel Sansum, Joseph Field, John Wood, Thomas Hyde, Edward Gardner, Samuel Pearce, William Tombs, and Thomas Biggs, be appointed a Committee to receive such subscriptions in London, who shall transmit the same from time to time to the Committee of the Glocestershire Cloth-Workers, to be by them applied for the purposes aforesaid.

THAT Mr. Charles Sansum, of Fenchurch-street, in the City of London, be appointed Secretary to the said Committee, who shall keep an account of all subscriptions received by them, and enter the same in a book to be kept by him for that purpose.

THAT the thanks of this Meeting be given to the Committee of the Glocestershire Cloth-Workers, and to Mr. Henry Clarke, of Stroud, their Solicitor, for their communication to us in this business, and for their upright conduct in managing the same.

THAT the above Resolutions be inserted in the Sun, Daily Advertiser, and in the Glocester and Salisbury Journals.

By order of the Meeting,  
CHARLES SANSUM, Sec.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000532/17940616/024/0004
Gloucester Journal - Monday 16 June 1794

*To the Committee of Cloth-Workers, appointed to conduct a Bill in Parliament, for the purpose of regulating the use of Gig Mills.*

NEIGHBOURS,

I, SOME time past, received a letter signed by two persons who are, as I understand, Members of your Committee, stating, "That the Cloth Workers had applied to Parliament for an act to regulate Gig-Mills, agreeably to the advice of his Majesty's Attorney General;" "That a Committee of Cloth-Workers was appointed to conduct the business with regularity." "That a fund was established to pay the expence;" — "That a petition had been presented the House of Commons, on the 16th of May." And finally, "requesting my assistance, so that the same might be carried through the House with effect;" — "desiring my advice on the occasion;" and informing me, "that, one of the body would wait upon me, to give me further information relative to the business."

The person deputed has called upon m; I have informed myself, as far as I can, of your proceedings relative to your bill; and shall *thus publicly* give you my sentiments, that they may neither be misunderstood or misinterprated by any of you.

I am ignorant as to the general merits of your case; nor am I competent to decide whether the act *you think* you have been soliciting would be advantageous, or otherwise, to yourselves and the country; but if it be necessary to your welfare, it is be wished you had proceeded in such a way, as that the merits might have come before the House.

It is not an uncommon saying, that *"what costs nothing, is worth nothing;"* you seem to have carried this maxim so far as to think, that every thing which costs money must be valuable in proportion. What but such an infatuation could induce you to send your money to see the most expensive Council, in order learn, *whether an act of Parliament*, which stands on the statute book (legible to every one), is or is not a law in force, and how far Gig-Mills were necessary to the making of cloth.

What but the same spirit could have directed you, to appoint agents in town and country, to bring forward a petition to Parliament on *the 16tb of May* (six weeks after the time of receiving private petitions was past) to introduce this petition to the House by a Member totally a stranger to your county and your case; which Member was furnished with *no motion to make*, no bill to offer, no proofs in support of the allegations; when any man, in the least conversant with Parliamentary business, could have told you, that a petition (although delivered in due time) is merely an introductory measure; and that, until a motion is made to consider it, it must lie *unnoticed* on the table; and when, from the lateness of the Session, it was *impossible* (consistently with the usual forms of the Houee in such cases) that an act could be produced before the adjournment?

This letter will, I hope, convince you that I am always ready to answer your applications to the best of my judgment; but to pretend that I could give you any *assistance* under such circumstances, would be to deceive you, and make myself accomplice in the absurdity. And as to *advice*, I own, when I see number of decent orderly men, with rational understandings, who can relinquish a life of industry which produced a comfortable subsistence, and who determine to expose themselves to be dismissed by their employers, and to live *in common* on the little capital derived from the surplus of their former earnings, for the purpose *of laying a piece of useless paper on the table of the House of Commons*—I cannot but suppose that they are strongly biassed by some motive adverse to reason, and that advice which is *so cheap as to cosr nothing*, and which will not flatter their proceedings, will very coldly received.

Had you asked my advice *before*, in instead of *after* you had *acted*, I might reafonably have supposed you determined tofollow it.—I should, in such a case, have told you, that if you were *sure* of making it clear, to the conviction of the Legislature, that the laws In being were defective, add injurious the *general* interests of the *whole* Community, and that, from such defect, the industrious classes, who now live by their own labour, would become an idle burthen on the Community: I should have told you, that such a case being once *made evident*, there could be no further difficulty in procuring a law to obviate the evil, without Counsellors, petitions, or funds. A bill might then readily be brought forward by those *whose duty* it is to do it; and such a law would pass without any cost to the persons benefited.

But, on the other hand, if it *could not be proved* that a *general* evil would be obviated, or a *general* good obtained, I should have added, that all the *Agents*, *Counsellors*, and money of yourselves and masters, would not procure such an act; and therefore that all you could spend in the attempt would be thrown away.

Need I produce instances in proof of this opinion, I refer you to the Friendly Society Act of last year, solicited by no one who obtained the benefit of it. I refer you further to an act which has passed both Houses in the last week, whereby poor and indigent persons, who were heretofore required to perform six days personal service on the highways, without the power of relief from the Magistrate, are relieved from this duty as far as the general interests of the Community will admit; yet the poor persons concerned in this benefit paid no Counsellors or Agents; nor did they make themselves poorer, in order to raise a fund for that purpose.

They have submitted n obedience to the law, in confidence that the *general good* would be pursued, and that the oppression of the poor could not make part of the *general good*. By this conduct, they enabled their advocates to avail themselves of the force of reason and of justice in their favour.

G. O. Paul. *Queen-street, June 12, 1794.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000532/17960718/010/0003
Gloucester Journal - Monday 18 July 1796

At the Salisbury Assizes an action was brought by certain Shearmen of Wiltshire against Mr. Cooke of Marlborough, for using a Gig-mill, contrary the stature of 5 and 6 Edw. 6; when after a full hearing, a verdict was given for the Defendant, Mr. Cooke.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000191/17960730/004/0002
Ipswich Journal - Saturday 30 July 1796

At Salisbury assizes, a cause of great importance to the manufacturing interests of this country, was tried at nisi prius before Justice Grose and a fpecial Jury. An action was brought by journeyman Shearman (supported, as it is imagined, by the whole body of men of that description) against Mr. Sam. Cook, jun. of Marlborough, for erecting and using a machine, called a Raiser. The action was founded on a statute of the 5th and 6th Edw. VI. cap. 22. which prohibits the use of certain machines, then known by the name of gig-mills, and which were used for the perching and burling the cloth. The learned Judge was perfectly satisfied that neither the machine in question, nor even the gig-mills of the present day, could be the machines intended to be prohibited by the statute of Edward VI.; and he was of opinion, that the commercial interests of the country were greatly benefited by the introduction of machinery in general. The jury, without hesitation, found a verdict for the defendant.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001279/17960806/021/0003
Hull Advertiser - Saturday 06 August 1796

At Salisbury assizes a cause of great importance to the woollen manufactory was tried, before Mr. Justice Grose, and a special Jury. It was an action brought by Journeyman Shearman (supported, as it is imagined, by the whole body of men of that description) against Mr. Sam. Cooke, jun. Marlbro', for erecting machine called a Raiser, and founded on the penal statute of the 5th and 6th of Edward VI. which prohibits the of what were then called Gig-mills, for perching or raising cloth. Mr. Dallas, for the prosecution, made a most animated speech and examined eight witnesses to prove that the machine in question was within the statute.— Mr. Gibbs, for the defendant contended that this was not proved, and that he was therefore entitled to a verdict; Mr. Justice Grose coincided with Mr. Gibbs; but the Jury expressing a wish to hear the evidence for the defendant, the trial proceeded, the course of which it was proved that the machine (a model of which was before the court) was totally different in its make, application, and life, from the ancient Gig-mill,— that it neither perched nor buried the cloth;— that far from injuring the manufactory, it was highly beneficial to it; that the inventor, a Mr. Harmar of Sheffield, had obtained a patent for the sole making and selling it;—and that by the use of it, as well as other machines, the woollen manufacture was risen to an unexampled pitch greatness, and afforded an inexhaustible source of wealth to this country. The learned Judge was perfectly satisfied that this machine, nor even the gig-mill of the present day, could be the machine intended to be prohibited by the statute of Edward the 6th; and after having given a clear and distinct charge to the Jury in which he descanted the great utility and advantage of machinery in general to the commercial interests of the kingdom, the Jury, without going out of the court, gave a verdict for the defendant.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002429/18030226/015/0002
Oracle and the Daily Advertiser - Saturday 26 February 1803

THE WOOLLEN TRADE

For the DAILY ADVERTISISER AND ORACLE. 

Respecting the discordant matters in the Woollen Manufactories, it is a pity Gentlemen in Parliament, who are to decide on the merits of a Bill to. regulate trade, should not receive better information, or understand enough of the principles to prevent so many misconstructions on Acts of Parliament, which, instead of rendering them clear and decisive, are too often found ambiguous and unintelligible, and this occasions much contention.

A few years since the Sheermen brought actions against the Clothiers for using the gig-mill to abridge their labour; and herein they failed, because in the Act of Parliament on which they proceeded it was described as a "burling machine," and Sheermen are not Burlers. This was tried at Salisbury.

It is now represented to Parliament that the Sheermen oppose. "a certain chemical process;" this is wrong. It should have been said mechanical; for it is machinery only which they oppose.

Manual labour is much taken off, and laws established by idle labourers, in clubs and secret committees, supported by compelling every individual to contribute a regular and equal portion, or be expelled from his trade. That the employer suffers much injury in his property, is cheated of labour for which he pays, and the credit of the cloths are affected to a serious degree in those countries where nocturnal depredations have prevented the use of gig-mills. This must introduce the sheering machines, which would render the manufacturers, in some degree, independent of these combinations, and greatly reduce manual labour. But the gig-mill has a contrary effect; for though it is a substitute for labour in raising wool on the face of the cloth, it produces so much more than Sheermen, by labour, will raise, that they are fully repaid in the extra business of cutting it off; and the cloth has a much more soft and delicate appearance.

A FRIEND TO TRADE, AN ENEMY TO COMBINATIONS, BUT NO MANUFACTURER, AND A CANDID OBSERVER.

N. B. Gig-mills in some parts of England have been in constant use for time immemorial, though so violently opposed in others.

Through every combination amongst workmen, none is so desperate, secret, or systematic as that of the Sheermen.


In *British Press*, [Friday 25 March 1803](https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002643/18030325/001/0001). Also in *Star (London)*, [Friday 25 March 1803](https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002646/18030325/007/0002).

WOOLLEN TRADE.

Extract of the Report of the Committee to whom the Petition of the several Persons concerned in the Woollen Trade and Manufactories within the Counties of Somerset, Wilts, and Gloucester, was referred.

Mr. Edward Sheppard, Clothier, at Uley in Gloucestershire, upwards of 15 years, being examined, said, that if the statute of the 5th Eliz. ch. iv. was carried into affect, a very great part of the trade of the county of Gloucester must be lost, as a very great proportion of the weavers at present employed had not been apprenticed; that, in his own manufactory, at one establishment, he employs about seventy-five weavers, out of Which five only have been apprenticed according to the above statute; that at the other he employs about eighty-three, out of which sixteen have been apprenticed; the greatest proportion are men, some are women. With respect to the cloth workers, he has not one amongst the whole who has been apprenticed seven years; he infers, that if none but legal weavers were employed, he should lose the major part of his trade—That notwithstanding the introduction of spring looms (which of late years have very much increased the number of looms) there is not at this time any surplus of competent and good weavers existing—So necessary is it that the number of weavers should not be decreased, the coarse woollen trade has already been, in a great degree, lost to the county of Gloucester, principally for want of weavers to carry on that branch of manufacture: He conceives that a very short period of time (within a year) is necessary to acquire a proficiency in the art of weaving —That, by the change in the nature of the woollen manufactory, in consequence of machinery, it has been and is necessary to form manufacturing establishments in villages, where the advantages of water and fall are materially considered, therefore, in such situations apprenticed weavers are not to be met with—That, in consequence of the great increase in the demand for woollen cloths of late years, a great number of people, of every description, have embarked in the trade as clothiers, who have not been apprenticed, and therefore would, by the enforcement of the said statute, be thrown out of business; that he himself has never been so apprenticed, neither does he know any one who has; and he conceives it necessary for the well-being of the woollen trade, that the manufacturer should, as occasion required, either from the opening of new markets, or increased demand in old ones, have it in his power to employ such work-people in every branch as may be requisite—That if clothiers are restricted from the employment of work-people who have not been apprenticed, an extension of their trade would be impossible on any occasion of extraordinary demand—That he believes it to be contrary to the fact, that the number of regular weavers, able and willing to work at the ancient and usual prices, who are out of employ, is immense, or that their number are daily increasing; he speaks only of the county of Gloucester—That, from his own experience, the employment of persons, not regularly apprenticed to the business of weaving, does not tend to destroy the good quality of the manufacture; that he has never known, or heard till lately, of any prosecutions for enforcing the above statute—That the number of apprentices has greatly diminished of late years, which he conceives to be the consequence of the present increase of the woollen trade.—That, out of the number of persons employed in both his establishments, he cannot exactly say what proportion are men to the women (as they work at their own houses), but a much greater proportion are men. That by the introduction of the spring-shuttle, more cloth has been made, which could not otherwise have taken place from the want of weavers, as the operation of weaving is now performed by one person, instead of two, to the great saving of the labour; it being a measure of the weavers own adoption, they are paid the same per piece as before the introduction of the spring shuttles—That he gives no preference to apprenticed weavers, but the very reverse, as they in general are old men—That, as the trade is now carried on, a great many persons are employed as work-people, for their own benefit, at an earlier age than they could have been under the operation of the existing statute, and that mere women are now employed in weaving than formerly, in common with the increase of men—That it has not been the practice in Gloucestershire for persons to be bound apprentices in villages (to which it is necessary to resort on account of water and fall) nor does he think legal weavers could have been found to be transferred from one part of the county to the other, sufficient to take the apprentices; that he does not think any apprentices would be bound on the conditions to the woollen trade generally, so as to be equally transferred from one branch of the trade to the other, with those who are now employed as workmen—That the repeal of the statute requiring weavers to serve apprenticeships, would certainly not prove ruinous to the legal weavers or their families—That many weavers receive work from different masters, and have many warps by them at the same time belonging to those different masters, by which means the return of the work is very much delayed, and therefore the number of weavers is not in proportion to the quantity of cloth required to be made. Being asked, Whether any prosecutions had been commenced, or threatened, under the aforesaid statute? he stated, that there was a prosecution at the last summer assizes for Gloucestershire, but under what statute he did not know, but he understood that it was compromised by withdrawing a juror-He does not know that the defendant did undertake that in future he would employ none but legal weavers, or upon what terms, but he knows that a great many notices have been given of prosecutions against master weavers since, and that friendly societies or clubs have been formed with a view to commence prosecutions against those who use or exercise the trade of a woollen cloth weaver. illegally; in confirmation of which, the witness produced a book, intituled "Rules and Articles of a Friendly Society, or Club, called the Woollen Cloth Weavers' Society, begun the 24th day of September, 1802;" and also, copy of an advertisement inserted in the Gloucester Journal, September 6th, 1802, "calling a meeting of one weaver out of the parish he represents, in order to determine on prosecuting those who unlawfully exercise or follow the trade of a weaver. (Signed,). W. H, Jessop, Solicitor."

Mr. GEORGE WANSEY, of Warminster, in Wiltshire, being examined, said, That he has been a clothier 2O years, but lately out of business—that the gig-mill first began to be introduced into Warminster in the month of April or May last.— Being asked, Whether he knew of any combinations in consequence of the introduction of the gig-mill, he said, there were nearly three-fourths of the shearmen who quitted their masters, and refused to work upon cloth after the gig-mill—That with respect to their riotous disposition, there are now four persons in the different gaols convicted for assaults and riots; and that many barns and outhouses of the clothiers have been burnt, and guns have been fired at night into the houses of the clothiers, and their workmen, who had become obnoxious on account of using the gig-mill.

Mr. WILLIAM SHEPPARD, clothier, at Frome, in Somersetshire, about 14 years, being examined, said, That in all markets, both home and foreign, the preference given to Gloucestershire cloths was so very evident, that he found it necessary to send the whole of his broad cloths near ninety miles weekly to be dressed by the gigs; since the introduction of the gig, his stock is lessened, and the cloths are wonderfully improved—that the necessity was so_great, that last year and the present he has been obliged to accept orders to a very large amount, delivered in an unfinished state, after being milled, so that the merchant who had received them, had them dressed by the gig after his own manner—that he (the witness) tried every thing in his power to finish them himself, but found it impossible; and rather than give up the orders, acceded to the terms—that the introduCtion of the gig mill will be highly beneficial, and that he has engaged to his workmen that he will employ them at 14s. per week as long as they are able to work.—And being asked, Whether he knew of any combinations of any workmen, in consequence of any attempt to introduce the gig-mill into his neighbourhood? He said, that meetings of shearmen are privately held to receive subscriptions so as to provide for those out of employ, and they produce a ticket so to entitle them to their weekly pay.

Mr. Richard BOWSHER, Solicitor at Bath, being examined, said, that he does not know of any prosecution being commenced against the clothiers for using the gig-mill, but has been informed by Mr. Wilmot, solicitor for the shearmen in Wiltshire, that he has received instructions to commence actions against such manufacturers who persevere in using the gig-mill.

Statute 2. and 3. Philip and Mary, c. 11. Sec. 2. and 3. read.

CHARLES BROOKE, Esq. (a Member), Basing-hall-street, merchant, being examined, said, that the nature of his business is chiefly in the sale of Spanish wool and superfine cloth. And being asked, whether he had any information to give respecting the petition of the clothiers for the repeal or alteration of divers statutes? he said, That he conceived it would be materially detrimental that any law should be repealed which tend to protect labourers in different branches of the manufactory. That it appeared to him that extreme caution will be necessary in repealing certain restrictive acts, of which the manufacturers justly complain, that others which tend to protect the labourers be not blended in that repeal. That at one period of the war, he believes between 1797 and 1799, from the scarcity of Spanish wool, the labourers could not be employed in the manufacture of superfine cloth, and at that period a great number of the manufacturers enrolled themselves in the Militia, and entered in the army.— Subsequent to that period, the large importation of Spanish wool, and considerable orders for cloth, called for the increased introduction of machinery; and that he conceives, at the present period, those men who have returned to the clothing towns, and are capable of resuming their employment, should have that given them before any further additions are made to machinery; that those men should, he conceives, in every degree, be protected at this period, when offers are made to induce manufacturers to quit the country, in order to establish the manufacture in Spain, with all the advantages to be derived from machinery. That it is a fact within his own knowledge, that a manufacturer who is competent to introduce and establish the manufactory, on the footing in which it is conducted in this country, may have 1000 guineas per Annum secured to him for a certain number of years, or a portion of the advantages to be derived from the manufactory, at his option. That as a case in point with the Court of Spain, and to shew the good faith they have preserved, under similar circumstances, with other manufacturers, some years since, about the year 1780, a tanner was induced to go to Spain, and was offered by that government every facility to establish his business on a huge scale; he stated, that a large capital would be necessary, which was furnished him, the witness believes, to the amount of 60,000l.; that a proper situation would be necessary to establish the business, and he was desired to travel the country, and to fix on any situation most likely to answer the purpose; that he was in consequence put in possession of a convent, at a short distance from Seville; the friars of the Order of St. Jago were removed to a different situation, to make room for the labourers he thought necessary to bring from England; that nearly 40 English families did in consequence settle there, protected in their religious principles, and allowed every requisite for their comfort and convenience; and that this establishment has so far succeeded, that the export of tanned leather, which at that time was very considerable, is now reduced to a very inconsiderable quantity.—To shew how much interested Spain is in the establishment of the manufacture of woollen cloth on the principle in which it is conducted by machinery, it must be observed, that the raw material, namely, Spanish wool, can be procured at one-third less than here; and that oil and soap, two other material articles in the manufacture, may be obtained at very little more than half the cost in this country; and consequently, if our labourers, from want of employment, are driven to seek that in another country, which they are deprived of here, we must naturally lose our foreign trade for this article of superfine cloth, which can be rendered much cheaper in Spain—that without the introduction of machinery into Spain, he conceives it impracticable for them to rival this country in the manufacture of Cloth—that if machinery was established in any other country, this country could not support a competition in the foreign market—that he has from the report of manufacturers themselves, that persons are out of employment in consequence of the use of machinery, but does not know it as a fact—that he has never publicly pledged himself to use his endeavours to prevent the further intorduction of machinery. He never had any communication with the labourers in any branch of the manufacture—that he cannot state particularly as to those restrictions of which the manufacturers justly complain, but they are those which preclude the exportation of unshorn cloth, and as to the measuring and folding of cloth, and others.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002194/18030509/024/0004
Sun (London) - Monday 09 May 1803

At Pontefract Sessions came on to he heard, an Appeal made by Thomas Haight, William Cowgill, Joseph Shaw, John Calton, Joseph Trotter, James Hurst, and Thomas Marshall, ail of Huddersfield, or the neighbourhood thereof, journeymen croppers, against the conviction of Joseph Radcliffe, Esq. (a most active and worthy Magistrate) for having beaten and attempted to force some of the workmen to leave the employ of Messrs. Atkinson, of Bradley Mill, because they used what is termed a Gig. Mill, which they have worked upwards of sixty years.—The respectable Bench of Justices confirmed the conviction, and all the above Appellants were committed to the House of Correction for two months, there to be kept to hard labour.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002643/18030702/006/0001
British Press - Saturday 02 July 1803

TO DO

WOOLLEN CLOTHIERS' BILL.

Mr. DICKENSON moved, that the Woollen Clothiers' Bill should be now read a third time.

Mr. BROOKES moved, that the words "three months" should be substituted for the word "no." `[now?]`

Mr. HURST expressed himself friendly to the present Bill. It was founded on the free spirit of trade and commerce, that the old Statutes from Richard 11. to George H.. should be repealed. They had been enacted upon the then existing state of the trade, and were totally unnecessary at present. He observed, that one year's apprenticeship was sufficient for a lad who was capable of learning his business. There were sufficient hands already to work the machinery, and the numbers ought not to be in. creased while soldiers were wanted for the army, and sailors for the navy. Surely if these could be spared for any purpose of industry, those employed in agriculture were mist in request He thought' the Statute-books had been well cleared of the rubbish with which they had been filled upon this subject; they were of no service, but to give practice to attornies, who were but too ready to take advantage of them. He wa? duidedly in favour of the 811. ' Mr. PETER MOORE said, he opposed the Bill for the same reasons the Honourable Gentleman supported it. It seemed to be considered, that three were only two parties concerned in the measure, but he conceived there was a third, whose interests were material. He referred to that period of the sixteenth century at which the woollen trade had been introduced into this country, and contended that it had been owing to the system of apprenticeship we owed its prosperity. He supported his opinion by to the sentiments of Dr. Adam Smith. It was, he said, a productive system, that yielded 24,000,0001. to the country. He objected to the repeal of the old laws, unless better ones were substituted for them. He though - . was a subject of great importance to the State. Mr. BROOKES said, he hoped the soldiers and salon that were wanted, would be provided by more constitutional means than taking them from our manufactures. Mr. ISAAC HAWKINS BROWN proposed that this should be merely a Bill of experiment, and that 'it should be limited .to two years; if this was agreed to, he should give his vote for the measure. Mr. WILBERFORCE also wished for some• compromise ;- he had not brought his mind to a conclusion, but he was rather inclined to its being a Bill of expieriment. Admiral BERKELEY supported 'ha measure.; he entreated the House to pus the Bill, observing, that if it was not passed, thay might besuaded mr from what had been said relative to the C.rgy Bill. how merciful the attornies would be, there would - no doubt be an hundred aelions. With regard to regulations, the workmen should find him as zealous m supporting those for their benefit, as for their : masters. He did not find that any regulations whatever were introduced, consequently lie was for the Bill going on. Dr. LAWRENCE contended, that the Bill was necessary upon the evidence of the petitioners themselves. He argued, that in a commercial country, the use of machinery was necessary. Their own evidence proved, that the use of machinery rendered the manufactures cheaper. It was by the adoption of such machines the woollen manufacture of this country had arrived at its present height. It was necessary the state of enmity and irritation which pervaded this branch of our manufactures should be put an end to, by the Legislature putting an end to the laws which referred to a period when it was in its infancy. He referred to a pamphlet and a letter, which had been transmitted to him by the petitioners, the contents of which he conceived disrespeCtful towards the House, and generally supported the Bill. Mr. SHERIDAN sail, he did net rise to enter into the merits of the question, such arguments had been used on both sides. Something had fallen Irvin the Learned Gentleman, which was rather injurious to the petitioners. He had stated, that his intention had been first called to the subject by a pamphlet and a letter. Now the petitioners had 'also sent him the same pamphlet; it was a common practice for persons concerned in Bills before the House to do so, and was perfeCtly right. The latter contained nothing more than a complaint that the House was going to pass the Bill without knowing precisely the question. The evidence taken before the Committee had been ordered to be printed, and before a man in the House had seen a page of it, the Bill was proposed to pass. These petitioners had a right to state their disapprobation of a proceeding they considered precipitate. The Learned Gentleman had said, that all he knew of the subject was from the evidence, consequently if he had not had an opportunity of seeing the evidence before the Bill ;seised, the House would have 'Loa the benefit of his speech.

Mr. BRAGGE said, there was no occasion to add arguments to those which had not been answered; nor was it necessary to enter into details of that which lay in a narrow compass. This Bill did no more than repeal the Statute of Henry `[sic]` VI. relating to a machine, which was supposed no longer to exist; he meant the gig-mill, to which that Statute referred. It had been proved before a Jury at Salisbury, and a very able Judge, that the gig-mill meant by that Statute was out of use—a had bee indicted for using a gig-mill and had been acquitted. The Statute did not relate to machines in general. The gig-machine was scarcely used in Gloucestershire, very little in Yorkshire, and principally in Wiltshire and Somersetshire. He was of opinion the House could not do better than pass the Act in its present state. It would not prevent discussing the subject in the ensuing Parliament. Enough had been said to sanction the present measure and the House was not pledging itself to making perennial.

In *Salisbury and Winchester Journal*, [Monday 04 July 1803](https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000361/18030704/011/0004). Also in *Gloucester Journal*, [Monday 04 July 1803](https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000532/18030704/016/0003).

HOUSE of COMMONS. FRIDAY, July 1

On the question for the third reading the Woollen Clothiers' Bill,

*Mr. Brooke* rose to oppose it, and moved, amendment, that it be read on that day three months.

*Mr. Bragge* said, the Bill went to repeal the statute of Edw. VI. which had been enacted to prevent the use of certain machine, called a gig-mill, and which machine no longer existed. Prosecutions, however, had been lately carried on against persons for using machines called that name, and it was necessary stop them.

*The Chancellor of the Exchequer* said, he subscribed to what was just stated his Right Hon. Friend, and observed, that the House should not be influenced in its decision by any consideration those outrages which had been committed in some of the Western counties.

The Bill was then read a third time, and passed. The several other orders were then disposed of, and the House adjourned.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000817/18061210/016/0002
Hibernian Journal; or, Chronicle of Liberty - Wednesday 10 December 1806

The activity of the woollen manufatcturers in the north and west of England, is a good deal quickened. The demand for the light cloth which it has been usual to manufacture for the West India market, has been of late greatly increased. The general use of the spring-shuttle enabling one man to perform the work of two in weaving; of the gig-mill for dressing and mosing, which at once abbreviates the labour and improves the execution; of the shearing-machine, to finish the dressed cloths for sale, has exceedingly advanced the manufacture within these few years, in the counties of Gloucester, Wilts, and Somerset. The quantity of the labour employed in these counties is now, in fact, three times as great that which they employed but a few years since.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002194/18070606/005/0003
Sun (London) - Saturday 06 June 1807

YORKSHIRE ELECTION. [FROM A CORRESPONDENT.]

Lord MILTON has now been for three days advancing on Mr. Lascelles, and having attained a majority over him of 52, it is expeded that Lord MILTON will carry his election.

At the close of the Poll on Wednesday Lord MILTON congratulated the Freeholders, that the County of York was found "to act whenever the Constitution was in danger"; and observed, "that if the people failed to watch the Ministry, we might soon become the subjects of a profligate King, and of a corrupt and Weak Ministry." His Lordship then alluded to the reigns of Charles II. and James II. He complained of his antagonists having made use of the sacred name of the King, and of the Arms of England, as a watch-word to a Party; and observed that he was as good a friend both to the King and the balance of the Constitution, as his competitors.

Mr. Lascelles observed, that his friends appeared to have given offence to his Lordship, merely by using in their hats a name and a device, which, he believed, were very commonly assumed at Elections, and often perhaps, with too little meaning. He now begged the attention of the Electors to a prophecy which he would venture to make. His ill success resulted from a dislike to him on the part of the great body of the Clothiers. He had done his duty with respect to the Clothiers' Bill, and could confidently appeal to them as having done it. He prophecied that this prejudice would soon subside, and that it would then appear to them, that he suffered in the minds of the Clothiers from the circumstance of some men having wished to deliver themselves from unpopularity with the inferior Clothiers, by throwing the blame on their Member.

...

We have already briefly adverted to the subject of the Clothiers' Bill, on which the Yorkshire Election appears likely to turn, as Mr. LASCELLES intimated. A few more words of explanation seem now, however, to be necessary. A contest has for some years subsisted between the small independent Manufacturers of cloth, who are a most numerous body, and a few great master manufacturers, who have begun to introduce, on a very large scale, a new system of workmanship. The small independent men have wished to enforce some obsolete laws, tending to enforce apprenticeship, and have even proposed to limit the number of looms in Yorkshire. The West of England was first in a ferment, and the North caught the infection. The Yorkshire croppers (or finishers) have at the same time taken the opportunity to urge the abolition of gig-mills. In short, the question has been the old one respecting the prohibition of improvements. A very able Report of a Committee of the House of Commons has been made on this subject, to which Mr. LASCELLES, as well, indeed, as Mr. WILBERFORCE, was a party, and which is in favour of the great manufaCturers; and a Bill, in pursuance of the Report, was prepared when the late Parliament was dissolved, in perfect accordance, as we have understood, with the sentiments of Mr. FAWKES. The same Bill will doubtless be revived in the present Parliament, and under the auspices, we presume, of the two new Members for Yorkshire, whoever they may be. Both Mr. WILBERFORCE and Mr. LASCELLES have suffered from this measure, though chiefly Mr. L. who declined standing for Yorkshire about a year ago, in consequence chiefly of the strength of the Clothiers' prejudice. Lord MILTON has not clearly declared himself on this topic, but he has certainly gained some thousand votes by the violent hostility to Mr. LASCELLES, of the great populous districts of Leeds, Halifax, Bradford, &c: from which quarter almost the whole of Lord MILTON'S majority during the last three days has proceeded.



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000236/18070615/003/0002
Leeds Intelligencer - Monday 15 June 1807

TO DO

the FREEHOLDERS of YORKSHIRE. A Few Remarks the Subject of this Extraordinary Election shall here be offered to the Public. Lord Milton as the Heir Apparent to a great and powerful Family, has-undoubtedly a high Claim to the Representative the greatest County in the Kingdom : The very Magnitude however, both of his Purse and his Influence in Yorkshire, is one Cirnimftab.ee ham. The fame Lord or Lord Milton, who his Property commands by his Purse command Yorkshire,. because the Expence of well fought Contest, in So. extended and populous a County, deters almost every Competitor. That this Observation is no one will deny, who knows that even the popular Sir George Saville fay, that he was returned for the County, not in the Castle-Yard> but in the Parlour of Lord Rockingham.— The Independent. Freeholders Yorkshire, and especially the manufacturing Classes were fenuble this in the Year when they rose nearly as one Man in Favour Mr. Wilberforce, and they have reaped the Benefit of their Choice, by Twenty-four Years of the most assiduous Attention bestowed by that Gentleman upon their Interests.—- Whenever this Spirit of Independence (hall loft in York* the County will converted into " one thofc dcfiraMc Appendages" which belong certain Freehold Estates, imd are sold with them ether Words will come under the Character Close Boroughs, with this Difference indeed, that the Proprietor vi ill the Honour of representing so vast a County to he a very distinguished Feather his Cap, and will to both his Political Party, and the County, and the Public, that the Freeholders whp have chosen him are peculiar* ly Independent, and that he is a truer of the People than any other, inasmuch as his is the County in the Kingdom. The late Election for Yorkshire has hroiight us nearer to. this Point. An unfortunate Misunderstanding between Mr. Lascelles and the Clothiers, which has also some Degree affected Mr. Wilberforce's Reputation for Strength, has led to the Reversal that Conduct which was adopted »he Mercantile Body in the Instance, the towering Family of Wentworth Fitzwilliam has been eagerly Supported the Clothiers. Coalition has been formed between an Oppositionist, whose principles are clearly those of niere Minority of the County, with a Body of Mercantile Men who think little of Politics, and are out of Temper, on Account having failed to acquire some absurd Privileges, which would ultimately ruinous even themselves, and which every Man the House Commons, not excepting Mr. Fawkes, faw the Folly of grunting. The Cry of " "No Coalition,' has been raiSed Mr. Lascelles and Mr. Wilberforce ? Might not retort the and call out for " No Coalition" in a much more important Sense. Ought not at least, these Manufacturers to have taken Care, that the YOUNG Nobleman whom they preferred in this evil Hour, Should be a Man who Stood engaged to that Bill in Parliament, which they deemed ruiflous to their Interests? Mr. Lascelles indeed has led out for this Pledge—But his Lordship, we know from the Party, hates Pledges, and not only hates Pledged he also hates Questions, on this Subject, and does not to answer them. He this Day admitted indeed his Obligation to the Clothiers ; he corroborated Mr. Lascelles's antecedent Observations respecting the true his Lordship's Superiority on the Poll, and his Lordship added, "When I forget the Clothiers, may my Right Hand forget her Cunning."— But did fay explicitly, that would Support their CauSe, and endeavour to reverie the which had turned out Mr. Lascelles. Not a Word of this kind escaped his Lips. is indeed estranged from the Subject. Talk to him about the Ln'ttle "Independent" Clothiers, —he declaims abr>iit Political "Independence." Speak to him about limiting the Number of Apprentices, he thinks only of limiting the Power Ministers. to him Gig Mills and Croppers. is meditating on the Number of his Coaches, his Chaifcs, and his (Jigs, and of the Number of Crops whom he has riding in them. His Lordship really seems not to have Three Ideas on this Subject, which is interesting to his Constituents. one Day indeed said a Word about prefering "the proper Balance between the and the Servant." are persuaded that he was thinking at that Time of the Balance of the Constitution. The History this Election is really curious. About a Month ago the Parliament was dissolved, and Mr. Wilberforce naturally offered himself again for Yorkshire. Mr. hastily declined. Mr. Lascelles now came forward, and it was expected that Mr. W. apd he over the Course. To the Surprise of every one, Lord Milton declared himself. Not a Man imagined that he could Succeed. Mr. W. had; at this Time, Nine-tenths of the County his Favour; for even the Oppositionists, in general, declared plainly for him, and Promise upon Promise crowded in from every Quarter. He was now Safe a= to Votes, but not so as to Money. Lord Milton's Committee faw Mr. W.s Difficulty at this Moment, and they deserve great Credit for their Penetration. His Lordship declared that would stand out the Poll. An urgent came the Committee of Mr. W. inquiring whether would undertake to pay his Half of all Lord Milton's Second Votes. The Committee hesitated ; they were afraid being involved, the Compliance, an indefinite Expence, when their Means were definite. They would have been answerable in their own Pockets the whole Extent of this immeasurable Engagement. This Hesitation was to the Public in a Hand Bill, Signed by Lord Milton's Committee, as to pear to Symptom Disaffection Lord Milton, and of Unfairness between the Parties; and it remarkable that the Hand Bill was propagated at Time when an Offer had been made place Lord Milton precisely the fume Footing With Mr. Lascelles, to which Offer not the AU lufion was made in the Hand Bill. The very Determination of Lord Milton to (land-, had spread Panic in the whole Camp Mr. Wilberforce for the Powers his Purse were tremendous. It was like the News of Invasion by Bonaparte. Mr. W. had instantly to provide his Ways and Means, to call together his Volunteers, and to defend himself a mere Army Mafic, against any Attack or Demonstrations of Hostility, which might be made by the regular, well organized, well paid and well fud Army of his Competitor. The of Mr. Wilberforce continued gradually advancing, till it reached Sum, trifling indeed to Lord Milton, of about or 60,c001. With great Economy this Sum might confidently be expected to hold out through the Contest. The Very great Multitude, however, of Mr. W. Votes, was a little dreaded as a Source of Expence. Lord Milton's Agents were so good as to causasde Mr. W. this Fear; by the Cry partly of no Coalition, by inserting Milton's Plumper in the Card of every Miltonite's Hat, by giving Popish Absolution to all who had proruiled Wilberforce, by Stirring the Hatred the Clothiers against the Supporters that horrible Bill which was likely to come before Parliament, by infilling that Lord Milton was at as good a Friend to the Abolition the Slave Trade as Mr. Wilberforce, by claiming Merit to him, in this Respect, the Son Lord Fitzwilliam, who had been President the Council in that Administration which effected the Abolition, forgetting that Lord F. was himself the greatest the Slave Trader, the seeming Popularity was transferred from Wilberforce to Lord Milton, and especially the Clothing Districts, which are uSually Mr. W.'s strong Hold, as well as in his other strong Hold, we mean the Hustings, where his Eloquence has been used charm every Ear. Here indeed his Voice began now to be regularly drowned by the Cry No Coalition," a Cry to which Lord Milton's Friend Mellisu and the Young Ruffian, and few other honest Fellow s from London, not a little contributed. We fay then again, that we admire the Dexterity Lord Milton and his Agents. They have evidently played the whole Game, and they deserve the Prize for the Skill, which from first to last they have manifested. Still, however, it must be remembered that Money was the chief Ally to which they trusted. Money gets Agents. Agents can raise a Cry either of "Popery" or Fopery," of "Coalition" or "No Coalition." Money makes Ride to York, from the greatest Diftar.ce to become extremely commodious and agreeable it can turn Water into strong Beer, or Beer into Wine, and a of Wine into a Bottle or a Couple of Bottles: not only produces Abundance of Yellow Ribbons in the Hats, but (as a York Orator, at Window observed the other Day,) the Yellow get also into the Pocket. Money can also produce Squibs, Puffs, Hand Bills of all Sorts and Sizes, and can secure the Circulation of them; it can command the Prefsj can secure the exact Orgazination of all Committee Business, can supply multiplied Lifts of polled and unpolled Votes, and ensure in every Hamlet and Village County, the most perfect Canvas. It can glean what poorer Candidate has left ungleaned, and the Close the Poll, It can bring Voters from the North and from the South, from the East and from the West, from Scotland or from Cornwall; And if Parliament would but consent to give a little more Time for Polling, from the East Indies and from the West Indies; it moreover can purchase Sense; it can provide Six Counsel instead of Two to contend against the Two Counsel of the Adversaries, and to assist the Two other Counsel of the Sheriff, and it can provide Double Sets of Attornies in the Towns of Yorkshire; the one to contend by Day and the other by Night, against the mere voluntary Agents of a Wilberforce.

A FREEHOLDER. York, June 5 1807.

TH:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Statutes_at_Large

1551 (5 & 6 Edw. VI) Gig Mills Act 1551 c. 22

Also: Wool Act 1551 c. 7; Woollen Cloth Act 1551 c. 6; Woollen Cloth Act 1551 c. 8

https://archive.org/details/statutesatlarge24britgoog/page/n415/mode/2up
Statutes at Large ... 1763 Pickering

p.388

Anno quinto & secxto EdW. VI c.20-22. 1552,

CAP. XXII

*An act for the putting down of gig-mills.*

*Forasmuch as true drapery of woolen cloths is to be commended as well in foreign realms as in this realm of England, and all ways and means used to the contrary are to be eschewed and taken away; (2) and forasmuch as in many parts of this realm is newly and lately devised, erected, builded and used certain mills called gig-mills, for the purching and burling of cloth, by reason whereof the true drapery of this realm is wonderfully impaired, and the cloth thereof deceitfully made by reason of the using of the said gig-mills:* (3) for remedy whereof, be it enacted by the King our sovereign lord, the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons, in this present parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, That no manner of person or persons, after the last day of *May* next coming, shall use or occupy any of the said gig-mills, for the working of any woolen cloth or cloths made or to be made within this realm; (4) upon pain of forfeiture for every cloth so wrought in or by any of the said mills called gig-mills, v. li. The moiety of all and every such forfeiture and forfeitures, penalty and penalties, to be to the use of our sovereign lord the King and his heirs, and the other moiety to the use of him that shall sue for the same in any of the King's courts, be it by writ, bill, plaint or information, wherein the defendant shall not be admitted to wage his law, nor any protection, ession or injunction shall be to him allowed.


https://www.jstor.org/stable/4285190?seq=1
The Shearmen and the Wiltshire Outrages of 1802: Trade Unionism and Industrial Violence
Adrian J. Randall
Social History, Vol. 7, No. 3 (Oct., 1982), pp. 283-304 (22 pages)


https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=AZ5PAQAAMAAJ

Observations on Woollen Machinery

[ J. Anstie, Observations on the Importance and Necessity of Introducing Improved Machinery into the Woollen Manufacture 1803 ]

printed by Edward Baines, Leeds



--

https://archive.org/details/statutesatlarge26britgoog/page/n261/mode/2up
Statutes at Large ...
by Great Britain

Publication date 1768

pp.211-

Anno nono Georgii III. c. 29 1768

CAP. XXIX

*An act for the more effectual punishment of such persons as shall demolish or pull down, burn, or otherwise destroy or spoil, any mill or mills; and for preventing the destroying or damaging of engines for draining collieries and mines; or bridges, waggon ways, or other things used in conveying coals, lead, tin, or other minerals, from mines; or fences for inclosing lands in pursuance of acts of parliament.*

*WHEREAS by an act passed in the first year of the reign of his late majesty King George the First, intituled, "An act for preventing tumults and riotous assemblies, and for the more speedy and effectual punishing the rioters", it is, among other things, enacted, That if any persons unlawfully, riotously, and tumultuously assembled together, to the disturbance of the publick peace, shall unlawfully and with force demolish or pull down, or begin to demolish or pull down, any church or chapel, or any building for religious worship, certified and registered according to the statute made in the first year of the reign of the late King William and Queen Mary, intituled, "An act for exempting their Majesties protestant subjects dissenting from the church of England from the penalties of certain laws", or any dwelling-house, barn, stable, or other outhouse; that then, every such demolishing or pulling down, or beginning to demolish or pull down, shall be adjudged felony without benefit of clergy; and the offenders therein shall be adjudged felons, and shall suffer death as in cases of felony without benefit of clergy: and whereas some doubts have arisen whether the said act extends to the pulling down and demolishing of mills:* therefore, for remedying the mischiefs which may ensue therefrom, and for the more effectual punishment of such offenders, be it enacted by the King's most excellent majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the lords spiritual and temporal, and commons, in this present parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, That if any person or persons unlawfully, riotously, and tumultuously assembled together, to the disturbance of the public peace, shall, at any time after the first day of *July*, one thousand seven hundred and sixty nine  unlawfully and with force demolish or pull down, or begin to pull down, any wind saw mill, or other wind mill, or any water mill, or other mill which shall have been or shall be erected, or any of the works thereto respectively belonging; that then every such demolishing or pulling down, or beginning to demolish or pull down, shall be adjudged felony without benefit of clergy, and the offenders therein shall be adjudged felons, and shall suffer death as in case of felony without benefit of clergy.

II. *And whereas no effectual provision bath heretofore been made for preventing the burning of mills,* be it therefore enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any person or persons shall from and after the first day of *July*, one thousand seven hundred and sixty nine, wilfully or maliciously burn, or set fire to, any wind saw mill or other wind mill, or any water mill, or other mill; such person so offending, being lawfully convicted thereof, shall be adjudged guilty of felony without benefit of clergy, and shall suffer death as in case of felony without benefit of clergy.

III. *And for more effectually preventing the destroying of engines for draining collieries, coal mines, and other mines, and bridges and waggon ways used in conveying coals, lead, and other minerals from thence; and also fences made or to be made for inclosing lands by virtue of acts of parliament;* be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any person or persons shall at any time after the first day of *July*, one thousand seven hundred and sixty nine, wilfully or maliciously set fire to, burn, demolish, pull down, or otherwise destroy or damage, any fire engine or other engine erected, or to be erected, for draining water from collieries or coal mines; or for drawing coals out of the same; or for draining water from any mine of lead, tin, copper, or other mineral; or any bridge, waggon way, or trunk erected, or to be erected, for conveying coals from any colliery or coal mine, or staith for depositing the same; or any bridge or waggon way erected or to be erected, for conveying lead, tin, copper, or other mineral, from any such mine; or any fence or fences that are or shall be erected, set up, provided, or made, for dividing or inclosing any common waste or other lands or grounds, in pursuance of any act or acts of parliament; every such person, being lawfully convicted of any or either of the said several offences, or of causing or procuring the same to be done, shall be adjudged guilty of felony, and shall be subject to the like pains and penalties as in cases of felony; and the court by or before whom such person shall be tried, shall have power and authority to transport such felon for the term of seven years, in like manner as other felons are directed to be transported by the laws and statutes of this realm.

IV. Provided always, That no person or persons shall be prosecuted by virtue of this act for any offence or offences committed contrary to the same, unless such prosecution be commenced within eighteen months after the offence committed.


--

Led to repeal of legislation, 1809

https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/3104942.pdf?addFooter=false
The Philosophy of Luddism: The Case of the West of England Woolen Workers, ca.
1790-1809
Author(s): Adrian J. Randall
Source: Technology and Culture , Jan., 1986, Vol. 27, No. 1 (Jan., 1986), pp. 1-17


1809 repeal of acts relating to protected working practices in woollen trade

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Woollen_Manufacture_Act_1809



https://www.jstor.org/stable/4285190
The shearmen and the Wiltshire Outrages of 1802: Trade Unionism and Industrial Violence
Adrian J. Randall

Social History
Vol. 7, No. 3 (Oct., 1982), pp. 283-304 (22 pages)





