# Edward Baines


https://archive.org/details/vol03_201909/page/n239/mode/2up
Encyclopedia Britannica - Volume 3, 1911

p.223

BAINES, EDWARD (.1774-1848), English newspaper-pro¬ prietor and politician, was bom in 1774 at Walton-le-Dale, near Preston, Lancashire. He was educated at the grammar schools of Hawkshead and Preston, and at the age of sixteen was appren¬ ticed to a prin'er in the latter town. After remaining there four years and a half he removed to Leeds, finished his apprenticeship, and at once started in business for himself. He was always a most assiduous student, and quickly became known as a man of great practical shrewdness and ability, who took a keen interest in political and social movements. His political opinions led him to sympathize with nonconformity and he soon joined the Independents. In 1801 the assistance of party friends enabled him to buy the Leeds Mercury. Provincial newspapers did not at that time possess much influence; it was no part of the editor's duty to supply what are now called "leading articles," and the system of reporting was defective. In both respects Baines made a complete change in the Mercury. His able political articles gradually made the paper the organ of Liberal opinion in Leeds, and the connexion of the Baines family with the paper made their influence powerful for many years in this direction. Baines soon began to take a prominent part in politics; he was an ardent advocate of parliamentary reform, and it was mainly by his influence that Macaulay was returned for Leeds in 1832; and in 1834 he succeeded Macaulay as member. He was re-elected in 1835 and 1837, but resigned in 1841. In parliament he supported the Liberal party, but with independent views. Like his son Edward after him, he strongly advocated the separation of church and state, and opposed government inter¬ ference in national education. His letters to Lord John Russell on the latter question (1846) had a powerful influence in determining the action of the government. He died in 1848. His best-known writings are:— The History, Directory and Gazetteer of the County of York; History, Directory and Gazetteer of the County of Lancaster-, History of the County Palatine and Duchy of Lancaster. He was also the author of a History of the Wars of Napoleon, which was continued under the title of A History of the Reign of George III.

His Life (1861) has been written by his son, Sir Edward Baines (1800-1890), who was editor and afterwards proprietor of the Leeds Mercury, M.P. for Leeds (1859-1874), and was knighted in 1880; his History of the Cotton Manufacture (1835) was long a standard authority. An elder son, Matthew Talbot, Baines (1799-1860), went to the bar, and became recorder of Hull (1837). He became M.P. for Hull in 1847, and in 1849 president of the Poor Law Board. In 1852 he was returned for Leeds, and again became president of the Poor Law Board (till 1855). In 1856 he entered the cabinet as chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/titles/leeds-mercury

The Leeds Mercury was established by John Hirst in 1718 as a weekly newspaper in the rapidly growing West Yorkshire woollen textile town. The Mercury was one of the foremost provincial newspapers, publishing articles by many distinguished writers and gaining a reputation as a leading reporter of Liberal politics.

In 1801 the Mercury was purchased by Edward Baines, a young Liberal and Nonconformist printer, who used the newspaper to campaign tirelessly for moderate social and political reform. His son, Edward, worked as a journalist for the newspaper, and became proprietor following his father's death in 1845. He in turn left the controlling share in the newspaper to his children in 1890.

The Mercury began as a four-page Saturday newspaper, but it gradually increased in size, frequency and popularity, being published daily from 1861. By 1900 week-day editions contained ten pages, but on Saturdays it included twelve pages and an additional supplement, all priced at only 1d. The circulation also expanded to more than 5,000 copies per week by the 1820s, and the Mercury claimed in the edition of 4 January 1840 to have eight times the 'average circulation of Provincial Papers'.

The diversity of articles in the Mercury was crucial to its popularity. As a local newspaper, it included unusually extensive coverage of parliamentary and national affairs. This particularly flourished under the editorship of Thomas Wemyss Reid, who established a London Office in 1870 and who gained the confidence of Prime Minister William Gladstone. However, local news remained central to the paper, with detailed articles on government and civic events in Leeds and surrounding Yorkshire towns. Simultaneously, the Saturday paper became a self-styled 'first class general and family newspaper', with many articles catering to specialist interests and offering general family entertainment.


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/titles/leeds-intelligencer

The Leeds Intelligencer was founded by Griffith Wright in Leeds in 1754 as a four-page weekly and originally known as Wright's Leeds Intelligencer. By the 1790's it was viewed as the leading Tory organ in Yorkshire. Griffith Wright passed on the running of the paper to his son, Griffith Wright junior. The poet Alaric Watts was editor 1822-5 and was a friend of Michael Sadler and Richard Oastler, prominent Tory leaders of the Ten Hours movement for factory reform.

The Intelligencer held its own amongst a plethora of Liberal and radical newspapers, its most vociferous opponent being Edward Baines's Leeds Mercury, which supported the interests of the manufacturers. With the alliance of the radical and the Tory press over the issue of factory reform, the Intelligencer frequently locked horns with the staunchly Liberal Mercury. It showed its support for Sadler and Oastler's Ten Hours movement and was sympathetic to the anti-Poor Law movement, printing many of Oastlers letters including one entitled "Slavery in Yorkshire", which appeared in the Intelligencer on 20th October 1831. In it Oastler castigated conditions in Yorkshire factories and incited voters not to return any MP who would not support a Ten Hours Bill. Feelings ran high. During a public meeting in Leeds in support of factory reform the crowd visited the offices of the Intelligencer, and Foster's radical Leeds Patriot to show their appreciation, then proceeded to burn an effigy of Edward Baines for his paper's criticism of the reform movement.

The Intelligencer strongly opposed the Chartist movement and took a protectionist stance in the debate over free trade. It also adopted an anti-slavery position during the American Civil War.

Christopher Kemplay, owner of the Academy for Young Gentlemen in Leeds, was the last sole proprietor and publisher of the Intelligencer. He sold the paper to the newly-formed Yorkshire Conservative Newspaper Company which turned the weekly Leeds Intelligencer into the daily Yorkshire Post and Leeds Intelligencer, launched on July 2, 1866

---
https://archive.org/details/encyclopaedia-britannica-8ed-1853/Vol%2016%20%28Navigation-Ornithology%29%20193323025.23/mode/2up?q=%22Leeds+Mercury%22

Encyclopaedia Britannica 8th Edition (1853-1860) ? 1853

p186

[Newspapers]

The Leeds Mercury was established in the year 1718, The Leeds and, for the purpose of evading the Stamp Act, was made Mercury, to extend to twelve pages, small quarto (or a sheet and a half; the stamp being then levied only on papers not exceeding a single sheet). Like its contemporaries, it was published weekly, and its price was three-halfpence. In 1729 it was reduced to four pages of larger size, and sold, with a stamp, at twopence. From 1755 to 1766 its publication was suspended, but was resumed in January 1767, under the management of James Bowley, who continued to conduct it for twenty-seven years, and raised it to a circulation of 8000. Its price at this time was fourpence. The increase of the stamp duty in 1797 altered its price to sixpence, and the circulation sank from 3000 to 800. It was purchased in 1801 bythe late Edward Baines, who first began the insertion of "leaders." It took him three years to obtain a circulation of 1500; but the Leeds Mercury afterwards made rapid progress, and became one of the most important and valuable of the country papers, as it still continues to be.



---
https://etheses.whiterose.ac.uk/441/
Thornton, David (1999) Mr Mercury: a biographical study of Edward Baines with special reference to his role as editor, author and politician. PhD thesis, University of Leeds.

https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=qYXpz54H6fwC&pg=PA111&dq=edward+baines+history+george+III&hl=en&newbks=1&newbks_redir=0&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwj926HG5_aCAxXzgv0HHdn_BlA4FBDoAXoECAUQAg#v=onepage&q=oliver&f=false
The Life of Edward Baines: Late M. P. for the Borough of Leeds
By Sir Edward Baines
eg Oliver pp92-6
on popular violence, condemning, p75-6  

https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=KHToAAAAMAAJ&printsec=frontcover&source=gbs_ge_summary_r&cad=0#v=onepage&q&f=false
History of the Reign of George III, King of the United Kingdom of ..., Volume 4 
Chapter V - 1817, Habeas Corpus, Blanketeers, Oliver, Pentrich


Attack on:

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000193/18320802/012/0002
Leeds Intelligencer - Thursday 02 August 1832

Our contemporary of the *Mercury* has lately made a splendid display of that correct taste and manly feeling for which his controversial lucubrations have long been celebrated.

We last week noticed his unaccountable mistake in attributing to us that of which we were not guilty, namely, "blackguard attacks" upon his nominee, Mr. Macaulay; he must have been nodding over his *own* really "blackguard attacks" upon Mr. Sadler. But on Saturday last he was quite awake, because the "main chance" was at stake. The meeting of the unemployed workmen upon Woodhouse Moor appears to have carried him to the top of his bent, and again the *Intelligencer* is struck at with all the fierceness of rage, but, at the same time, with that imbecility which excess of passion commonly produces.

It is alleged that the notice by which the meeting was convened "was issued from the *Leeds Intelligence Office*, printed by Hernaman and Perring."

"The placard, which was at once fraudulent and inflammatory, suppressed the principal part of the (*Mercury's*) paragraph, and misquoted the other part, for the *pure* purpose of raising a clamour by imposing upon those who had not seen the *Mercury*. The stratagem, however, did not take. The whole thing proved an entire failure. A few straggling people were seen upon the moor, staring at each other, and inquiring "What they had been brought there to do?" On which a report spread, that Messrs. Hernaman and Perring, theprinters of the placard, pitying their situation, had called them together to give them a treat of bread and cheese, and beer. But after loitering for some time upon the moor, the bread and cheese, like that on Knavesmire, did not arrive and they separated in disgust after passing some resolutions, one of which ought to have been that they are never likely to see better times till the Corn Laws are repealed, and till less than four hours out of every twelve of their labour is required to pay their share of the 30 millions a year in taxes, for which they are indebted to such politicians as Messrs. Hernaman and Perring. It was intended, we understand, to have had a fine display in front the *Mercury* office, for the promotion of "loyalty and social order," as the anti-jacobins used to call it. But this miserable exhibition would not do. We hear that the Meeting was adjourned till next Monday, when it is said that free beer is to be dispensed from the *True Blue* Committee-room, at the Intetligencer office; which according to report, wiil be the first act of charity that was ever *perpetrated* at that place."

The writer of this paragraph has evidently been a pitiable state of excitement, though his anger, like his charge of "blackguardism" was wholly misdirected, the Proprietors of the *Intelligencer* having no more to do with originating the meeting, or of preparing the placard, than the Mercury himself; they having merely acted as printers in the way of business, of the correctness of which assertion they are ready to convince even Mr. Mercury upon evidence which he cannot dispute; and this, we apprehend, is a sufficient reply to both the wit and the malice of our contemporary's discreditable paragraph.

But it appears that the printing of a placard the *Intelligencer*-Office, for the Operatives, is, in Mr. Baines's estimation, an inexpiable offence. The "adjourned meeting" was held on Monday, annd again, strange to say, Messrs. Hernaman and Perring were the printers of the notice; why Mr. Baines was not chosen, in preference, we cannot say; but certain it is that he did not on that day print for the unemployed workmen; yet he *caused to be printed*, and distributed too, most plentifully, on the Moor, a long tirade of abuse and misrepresentation of the *Intelligencer*, and praise of himself and his own virtuous actions, in the expectation, we suppose, of bringin back those whom he considers to wander when they cease to bring grist to *his* mill. He says,

"You are aware that one of your most public-spirired and kind-hearted Manufacturers has been lately obliged to stop his works on account of his embarrassments. You know too that some of your townsmen have taken an active part in raising subscriptions to set him a-going again, *that he moght be able to give work to the unemployed*. You know that the Printer of the *Leeds Mercury* has been particularly active in this business; that he has attended meetings; taken a leading part in them, and that he has been thus employed long and with great diligence. But what have the Printers of the *Leeds Intelligencer*, who have called you together this day, done either for him or his suffering workmen? Nothing but talk. These would-be friends of the suffering unemployed have attended no meetings, have lent assistance whatever to your and Mr. Hirst's cause, have subscribed no money,—in a word, they have done nothing to obtain employment for one single man among those who are out of work. They are men of *words*, and not of *deeds*, ready to make use of you for party purposes, but they will not move a hand or foot to serve you in your necessities. Mr. Hirst and his unemployed workmen ask for *bread*, and they give them *air*. And they then pretend to be sorry for the distresses of these meritorious people.— Their grief is, however, only *skin deep*; for it does not reach their *breeches* pocket.

"During the last thirty years there has not been a single instance of great distress among the unemployed poor, when subscriptions have been necessary for their relief, but the Printer of the *Mercury* has promoted those subscriptions, and worked night and day to serve their objects. I have seen it with my own eyes. The poor men, their wives, and their children have felt it. But I have *never* seen these persons, who now pretend to pity the unemployed, do any thing for them worth the name of exertion in these trying times. They have folded their hands and sat at ease, lying in wait for opportunities to slander and defame for mere party purposes the friends of the Poor.

"What have these slanderers ever done to serve the labouring classes? Nothing whatever! They have abused them when they have complained of their distress—when they have assked for the reform of abuses, when they have prayed for Cheap Bread and Cheap Government. They have in the *Intelligencer* called the Poor "the swinish multitude," "the scum of the earth," "the rabble," "nasty stinking unwashed artificers." This has been the language applied the *Intelligencer* to those very men, whom its Printers are now attempting for their own designs to deceive and bamboozle."

This is only a part of a much longer string of falsehood. The writer knows well—and do do the Operatives—that the *Intelligencer*, within the last three years, has changed hands, and that the present Editor has uniformly advocated the cause the poor and the oppressed in Leeds—as he had for many years previously done elsewhere in similar capacity. We are not disposed either to vaunt our own merits, or to decry those of Mr. Baines. If he can look back with satisfaction to *all* that he has *done for* the poor workpeople, let him enjoy his reminiscences, especially those which relate to the Luddite crimes and punishments. And granting that all be right in this and other respects; granting that Mr. Baines has laboured and spent his strength in the cause of the workpeople of this district, we rather think that those people have well paid for all benefits conferred, for their pence, in his keeping, have swelled to pounds; and noW the great Mr. Baines kicks away the ladder. Whatever he may have been—whether faithful leader or mis-leader, he is, at all events, no longer side by side with the people, but has become the apologist of ministerial delinquency, the supporter of fettered placemen, the libeller of the poor, and the opponent of that boon of humanity which they are struggling to obtain at the hands of the legislature. From the friend of the poor, he is become their adversary in the most vital sense; they have therefore quitted his selfish standard, and began to think themselves. If in the exercise their own free will they choose to bring some of their favours to the Intelligencer-office, they have done so without solicintion, direct or indirect, and we humbly submit that it is no good reason why Mr. Baines should vent his wrath in a shower of gross and libellous falsehoods upon the head of the Editor of the *Intelligencer*.

We feel great pain in thus speaking of a matter in which we have personal concern; but the peculiar ferocity of the attack, and the circumstances under which it is made, certainly call for the remarks we have offered. We are not thin skinned. We defy the utmost stretch of Mercurial malignity. Yet we should be culpable were we to display indifference as to public opinion, especially when the shaft of our unneighbourly assailant is aimed at private character no less than at public usefulness.
