# Luddite Tales, Retold

As is still the case today, every so often local newspapers would take a historical look back at the news of the past. Such reviews can provide us with a sense of how the original events might have been recalled in folk memory a lifetime or two later.

So let us begin with the origins of the Luddite troubles in 1811, and then make a quick foray through to 1817.


----

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000470/18750921/016/0004

Berwickshire News and General Advertiser - Tuesday 21 September 1875

OLD STORIES RETOLD. THE LUDDITES.

He (Bonaparte) makes the quartern loaf and Luddites rise.  
Old Nottingham the Land Lud.

In the early part of the year 1811, the operation of the decrees of the Emperor of the French against British commerce, coupled with the equally bad effect of the retaliatory British Orders in Council, began to tell painfully on the condition of the working classes. After so many years of war the country was feverish and exhausted. It might well be so. The National Debt had increased, since the accession of George III., by seven hundred millions or thereabouts, so that the total amount was at least eight times as great it had been in 1760; and the enormous sum of thirty-two and a half millions was absorbed yearly for the payment of interest; while Mr Pitt's Sinking Fund turned out a miserable failure. But for the foolish and wicked wars in which the Government had been engaged, the country might have been clear of debt; and, considering the industry of the bulk of the people, and its geographical and other advantages, it should have been the least heavily taxed part of Europe. But Pitt's continental system required the financial screw to be put on painfully tight. Poor people found infinite difficulty in making a living. Every article of consumption, on which it was possible raise a penny, was taxed to the utmost. The quartern loaf was at twenty pence. Salt was almost as dear it is said to be in Central Africa. And the scarcity caused by a series of bad harvests was intensified by the enactment of worse laws. Disaffection filled the land, in spite of fulsome loyal addresses. For the people suffered most cruelly, and they thought they saw the cause of their sufferings in their selfish inconsiderate rulers. The food of many of them was of the worst sort, and not half sufficient in quantity. Hundreds and thousands of poor mothers and their children were destitute of bread and even potatoes were to dear to be got at. The diet of these unfortunate creatures was oatmeal and water, and they had not enough even of that. Many actually perished for lack of sustenance.

While this was the sad condition of the working class, particularly in the manufacturing districts where myriads had been thrown wholly idle, or next to it, arising from stoppage of the export trade, and the inability of the home consumers to buy as much as they had done formerly, owing to their being so heavily taxed, the laws were barbarous in the extreme, quite so much so as they could ever be in Dahomey. Thus we have seen it stated that at Manchester, about the time we write of, a woman was tried and convicted of highway robbery, for taking some potatoes out of a cart in the street, and was hanged for it.

Thousands able and willing work compelled to have recourse to parochial relief for the support of themselves and families. At Nottingham, while the stagnation and distress were frightful, the parish overseers, hot being able to furnish the men with better employment, set them to clean and mend the roads. As might have been expected, these improvised scavengers hated that sort of work, and not being able to reach the real authors of their calamities and degradations, they turned their vengeance against their employers, to whose indifference to the well-being of the people under them they attributed the greater part of their misery. The factory system was still in its infancy, but was gradually extending over the land; and the large employment of new machines, for the lessening of hand labour and consequent cheapening of goods, coincident with the glut and stagnation caused by over-production, and non-intercourse with America as well as the Continent, roused the people to frenzy. It was these machines, they fancied, that did most of the mischief, and they therefore determined that the use of them should be given up.

The whole manhood left in the half-starved Nottingham stockingers, always a fierce set, seemed now to flow out in the breaking of stocking frames and other new-fangled appliances for doing away with hand labour. On the 11th of March, 1811, a large body of framework knitters assembled in the Market Place, and after working each other to a high degree of excitement, by a rehearsal of their unparalleled sufferings, and the alleged oppression which was committed upon them, by the several abatements which had lately taken place in the rate of wages, they expressed their determination to prevent any further restrictions, by taking prompt vengeance on those manufacturers who, they conceived, had been the most active in getting wages beaten down below the standard which men could keep body and soul together. The presence of the military saved the town for the nonce, but at Arnold, a village four miles off, the mob broke sixty three frames that very night, and rapidly did the mischievous contagion spread, that in less than three weeks at least 200 frames were broken to pieces in Nottingham and its immediate neighbourhood. Several persons were apprehended on suspicion of being concerned in these outrages; but no sufficient evidence could be got to warrant their detention. They were, therefore, to the great exhultation of their companions, uniformly ordered to be discharged. Several Bow Street officers were sent down from London, to secure, if possible, the apprehension of some of these nocturnal marauders, but without success. The Royal Lancashire Militia, who happened be on their way from Worcester to Hull, were detained in the town for several weeks, and while they remained things were pretty quiet.

But on the 4th November, the frame-breaking was renewed, with circumstances more alarming than in the spring. The outrages spread over the whole county of Notts, as well into the shires of Derby, Leicester, Lancashire, and York. The rioters styled themselves Luddites, from one Ned Ludd, an diot [*sic*]] who had once broken some frames in a passion. The system pursued by them was to assemble, by a preconcerted arrangement, in parties of from six to sixty, according to the nature of the work to be done, under an acknowledged leader, styled General Ludd, who had the absolute command over them, and directed all their operations. Their place of destination being arrived at, and the object of their vengeance clearly pointed out, the guards, armed with swords, firelocks, and other offensive weapons were duly stationed in their proper places, with orders, at the peril of their lives, to allow no one to pass or to stir out of their houses. The pioneers, as they might be termed, were then ordered promptly to advance, enter or break in the door, as the case might be, and proceed to their work of demolition, which was generally but the task of a few minutes. This being completed, and the whole of the party reassembled, the leader called over the list of his men, who answered by a particular number, after which he discharged a pistol, as a signal that all was right, and then each one made his way from the scene of action, and got home as best could.

When the party about to be attacked had received timely notice of what was in store for him, as was sometimes the case, and had taken measures of defence, the assailants usually took care to come in such force, and so well armed, as to make resistance hopeless. In several such cases the guards sought safety in flight.

In an attack on the house of a person named Hollingworth, of Bullwell, who had rendered himself specially obnoxious to the workmen, and who, expecting a nightly attack, had engaged seven or eight men, armed with muskets, to protect his frames, the first man who forced his way into the house received a shot the abdomen, which in a few minutes deprived him of life. Before he expired, however, he exclaimed, "Proceed, my brave fellows; I die with a willing heart!" His companions conveyed the dead body to the borders of the forest, near which Hollingworth's house stood, and then with a fury irresistible by the force opposed to them, again attacked the house, and in about an hour and a half fully accomplished their object. The unfortunate leader of the attack turned out to be a man who had lived in the village of Arnold, and his dead body was removed thither for interment. The funeral scene was one of truly terrific character. From seven to eight hundred stockingers assembled in the graveyard. The excitement was tremendous, Yells, threats, denunciations, and cries for vengeance were heard on every side. The Riot Act was read amid conflicting shouts, and the military at last had to clear the churchyard, which they did fortunately, without shedding blood.

Scarcely a night passed after this that there were not violent outrages of some sort. The rioters extended their operations over the whole district, where they broke all frames employed in the making of *cut ups*, or worked either at reduced prices or by hands not regularly brought to the trade. The consequences were ruinous to many of the small frameworkers and others, who through fear were compelled to cease working, and have their machinery under military escort removed into the town as a place of security.

In the early part of December, the magistrates both of the town and county issued a notice calling upon all publicans to close their houses at 10 p.m., and directing further that all householders, their servants and dependants, should remain within doors after that hour, so long as the disposition to tumult, then prevalent, should continue. They also intimated that to enter a house in the night time, to demolish a frame, was in the eye of the law burglary, and punishable with death, and that all offenders would meet with the utmost severity. It was hoped, by the publication of this notice and the arrival of additional troops (the Royal Horse Guards Blue and the Berkshire Militia), that the outrages would have been checked, if not subdued. But this expectation proved illusive, for the Luddites only increased in boldness over the whole length' and breadth of the Midland hosiery district; and the frame-breaking went on without interruption during the month of December and into the January following.

On New Year's Day, 1812, universal distrust and gloom pervaded Nottingham. Wheat, at this time, was 108s per quarter, while every other article of domestic consumption, as tea, sugar, spices, &c. were double, and in some instances treble, their present prices; in addition to which, it may be added that the Income-tax, enforced with unsparing severity, was ten per cent, and all the assessed taxes on a similar scale. Our foreign trade had fallen off to the extent of about sixteen millions per annum, while the public expenditure had advanced seven millions upon the preceding year. Want and misery prevailed to an appalling degree; and in the desperation of their circumstances it was noways unnatuarl [*sic*] that the working men of Nottingham, and other manufacturing towns like it, should be led to view almost every man as their enemy whose position gave him opportunity of controlling wages to any extent. The seeds of a social war were thickly sown, and, as in the case of Gadmus's teeth, ready to start up in the shape of armed men, for mutual extermination. On this occasion, the destruction of the machines, by which alone that employment could be furnished which the people clamoured and fought for, was the mad means taken avenge themselves on their supposed oppressors. Everybody now sees that this was most unwise, but if true that "oppression will drive a wise man mad," it was not to be wondered at that the poor stockingers in the Midland Counties, at their wits' end how to live, should have been suddenly seized by this destructive frenzy.

To enumerate every instance of frame-breaking in Nottingham and the country round during the winter of 1811-12 would fill a good-sized volume. In Bailey's "Annals of Nottinghamshire" there are long details of some of the more flagrant cases. The utmost daring was shown by the mischief makers, who usually assembled soon after nightfall, with their faces blackened, and armed with lethal implements, and proceeded to the houses of those who were obnoxious to them, and posting guards round about to prevent a surprise, and then wreaking their vengeance in the most deliberate way. The town was meanwhile strongly garrisoned by soldiers, and the authorities were all on the alert. But though the place was literally as if in a state of siege, and a secret committee was sitting in permanence, invested with a discretionary power to expend any sum not exceeding £2,000, for the purpose of obtaining such information as might be useful in bringing the rioters to punishment, and suppressing the disturbances, all seemed to be unavailing. Nothing could penetrate the mystery of "Luddism," nor break the bond of union which bound its devotees together. In spite of all their errors and all their crimes, therefore, it is impossible to withhold admiration from the stern integrity of purpose which thus led a number of poor men to withstand the tempting bribes of from a hundred to three hundred guineas, and in one instance five hundred to turn informants against their fellows.

The following letter from Nottingham, dated the 12th December, 1811, and printed in the *Gentleman's Magazine*, gives an account of these disturbances, which we deem worth quoting:—

"The insurrectional state to which this county has been reduced for the last month, has parallel in its history, since the troubled days of Charles the First, against which misguided Monarch it took so decided a part. These truly alarming tumults had origin in a complaint exhibited by the stocking-makers against some of the hosiers, on account of the latter abating the fashioning price of making some descriptions of stockings, and causing others, along with sandals, socks, caps, &c., to be cut out of pieces, in like manner as a tailor cuts garment; and the stockings, &c., thus made, were not only deprived of their proper loopy selvages, which are the grace, the ornament, and natural guarantee to the real value of the framework knitted stockings, but, many more could produced in any given time than could be of those properly fashioned, the wages of the workmen and the work itself were daily on the decline, as was also the credit of the trade. And if we add to these causes of complaint, the constant advancement in the price of every article necessary to human subsistence, the true causes of these disturbances will be found. The object of the workmen has been to destroy those machines, or frames, they are called in the dialect of the trade, that were employed in the making of pieces to be cut up into stockings, &c.; and indiscriminately by those belonging to the hosiers, who had rendered their names obnoxious by giving reduced prices. Day after day have the magistrates, both of the town and county, used every possible endeavour to restore tranquility; day after day have they added to the strength and activity of the civil power, and called in additional aid of the military but, hitherto, their exertions have been but of little avail; mysterious organisation has been brought into existence, which baffles every ordinary effort to suppress it. The rioters appear suddenly in armed parties, under regular commanders; the chief of whom, be whomsoever may, is styled General Ludd; and his orders are as implicitly obeyed as if he had received his authority from the hands of a monarch; indeed, it is well understood, that disobedience to his command is punishable with death, according to a solemn oath administered to all the party; and any person that gives information against any of them, subjects himself to the vengeance of the whole organised band, both in person and property; some dreadful examples in the latter instance having already been inflicted, by the burning of hay-stacks, &c.; hence it is that so few impeachments are made, and few of the depredators apprehended."

Up to the close of 1611 [*sic*]], about 700 frames costing from £16 to £120 each, had been destroyed.

---


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000470/18750928/012/0004

Berwickshire News and General Advertiser - Tuesday 28 September 1875

OLD STORIES RETOLD. THE LUDDITES.

The town was, as already said, full of military — between 800 and 900 cavalry and 1,000 infantry, in addition to the local civil and military force — a larger force, it was admitted in Parliament, than had ever before been found necessary, at any period of our history, to be employed in the quelling of a merely local disturbance. Yet all, as we have seen, was insufficient for the purpose. Indeed, the officers and soldiers, as is too often the case, were not the best sort of men to conciliate and pacify disaffected people. On the contrary, their conduct rather irritated than soothed those they were sent down amongst to preserve the King's peace. Thus the theatre had to be abruptly closed, by order of the magistrates, in consequence of tumultuous proceedings that took place there on several successive evenings. Some red-coated worthies were in the habit, it seems, of coming in quite sober, of course, at half-price, and as soon the curtain fell, of vociferating "God save the King!" and those who did not instantly obey their second imperious mandate, which was "Hats off!" were assailed with oaths, sticks, swords, &c. The stockingers, who were all what would have been called red-hot Radicals, had that term then been in use, naturally resented this military dictation. The cry of the drunken officers was answered by one of "Millions, be free!" and the people rose with their hats on. A free exchange of blows was to be looked for after this; it would have been miraculous had there not been a row; both sides equally enjoyed the fun; and both got their heart's fill of kicks and cuffs, and bufferings and bruises. Some of the Radicals got smart blows with the officers' canes in the pit and boxes of the theatre; and some of the officers got still smarter ones in the street after they had left the house, from the bludgeons the mob. In short, the people of Nottingham, particularly "the gods," conceived that no person had any right to order them to stand up and take off their hats, at the word of command, when a particular tune was played, either in the theatre or any where else. And the noisy loyalty of the militia officers, far from inclining the "fierce democratic" to more courteous behaviour, only tended to embitter them still more against all constituted authority, arbitrary, tyrannical, and wantonly oppressive.

On the 6th February, 1812, Mr Whitbread brought the subject of the riots at Nottingham under the consideration of the House of Commons, and inquired if Ministers were prepared to go into investigation of the subject. Eight days later, Mr Ryder, the Home Secretary, moved for leave to bring in bills "for more exemplary punishing persons found guilty destroying stocking and lace frames," &c. To the penal clauses of this bill, which made the of framebreaking, whether by day or night, till the 1st March, 1814, an offence punishable with death, some show of opposition was made in both Houses of Parliament, but it was ultimately carried and received the Royal assent. It was far beyond the wisdom of the Legislature, of course to devise any scheme for the abatement of that misery under which the people groaned, or the amelioration of those laws the injustice of which they complained of. All that it could undertake was to visit them with Draconian pains and endeavour to crush, their free, independent spirit, by depriving them of the right to carry arms for their own defence, which it had always been supposed was an Englishman's privilege. To suspend the Habeas Corpus Act, and place the disturbed districts under Martial Law, was the approved catholicon of Lord Castlereagh and his colleagues, and their proposal to that effect met with but feeble resistance from the Whigs, whose Liberalism was more of a profession than principle.

At the Lent Assizes, which took place previous to the new penal Act coming into force, a number of men, some of them mere youths, were found guilty of being concerned in breaking frames, and sentenced to seven and fourteen years' transportation. Some of these convicts got on well in New South Wales and Van Diemen's Land, and died possessed of considerable property, a thing which they were very unlikely to have done had they not been sent across the seas, for their own as well as their country's good.

Adding a new capital crime to our already sufficiently barbarous code was not the likeliest or best means, as events soon showed, of deterring the stockingers from acts of violence; for on the night of the 27th of April an extensive manufacturer and hosier in the town of Nottingham, named Trentham, was shot at while standing in the porch at his own house door, and wounded very severely. Rewards to the amount of six hundred pounds were offered for the discovery of the assassins, who were two in number, but in vain. For though it was almost certain that several persons were privy to the plot, and though strong suspicion fell on two desperate fellows, known to be connected with Luddism, yet nothing came out to incriminate them.

What may be termed sporadic cases of frame-breaking took place at intervals during the ensuing summer and autumn, and likewise in the following year, but nothing particularly calling for notice occurred till the evening of the 14th October, 1813, when a desperate affray took place between a strong party of police officers stationed in house at Basford, to protect an informer named Garton from threatened violence, and a numerous band of Luddites armed with pistols, who broke into the place in search of their man, but were driven out after some smart firing, leaving their leader, afterwards ascertained to be a very intelligent but hot-headed man named Samuel Bamford, dead on the parlour floor, one of the officers having shot him with a blunderbuss. Bamford had been the pet companion of a man named Towle, who had been apprehended on Garton's information. He was a man of small stature, but with courage and energy sufficient enough to qualify him for enterprises of the most hazardous kind. Under more favourable circumstances he might have writ his name in his country's annale, by the side of Moore, Wolfe, Nelson, and Wellington.

On their precipitate retreat from Garton's house after their leader's death, the Luddites shot through the head respectable framework knitter, named Kilby, who, hearing the affray, had ventured to open his front door, and look out to see what was going on.

In Bamford's case,a verdict of "Justifiable homicide" was returned; in Kilby's, one of "Wilful murder by some person or persons unknown." Large rewards were offered for the discovery of the perpetrators of the outrage, but the guilty individuals, and their associates, kept their own counsel.

The Luddite conspiracy, if it may be termed such, extended far beyond the confines of Nottinghamshire. In the counties of Lancaster, York, Derby, &c., similar disturbances occurred of more or less serious character. Threatening letters were written. Houses were set fire to. Sums of money were demanded and extorted. Arms were carried off. Machinery was broken. This seemed not to be the effect of any sudden impulse, but of an organised system of violence. The stimulus, however, was everywhere the same—hunger, enforced idleness, and hatred of the upper classes, owing to the idea that they were all banded together to oppress the poor working man. But there was no evidence to prove any political plot, no agitators among persons in the higher ranks, no open blatant demagogy, like a Kenealy's. It was a spontaneous movement of the people's'own, arising solely from the dearness of provisions and other causes of distress, aggravated by the conviction, to some extent well founded, that the Government and its supporters had very much to do with bringing that distress about, and intensified it while it lasted.

A special commission was issued for the trial of some Luddite gangs in Yorkshire, and opened by Baron Thompson, at York, on the 4th of January, 1813. The jury having found twenty-one of the men guilty of administering illegal oaths, riotously assembling, destroying the frames and looms of manufacturers of hosiery, lace and cloth, breaking into houses and robbery, fifteen of them were sentenced to suffer death, and six to be transported for seven years. The fifteen were all hanged at the same time, "in terrorem of others." Sixteen others, less deeply implicated, were discharged on bail, and fifteen, against whom nothing could be proved, were discharged without bail.

On the same occasion, George Mellor, of Longroyd Bridge, William Thorp, and Thomas Smith, of Huddersfield, were indicted for the wilful murder of William Horsfield [*sic*], of Marsden, merchant and manufacturer, at Lockwood, in the West Riding. Benjamin Walker, an accomplice, gave evidence against them. Horsfell had made himself obnoxious to the Luddites, through his being the possessor of a set of shears, which they found they could not get at to break, and therefore they determined to shoot him. They were all three found guilty and hanged.

At the Peace of 1814 new life seemed to be given to these disgraceful trade outrages, which accordingly, after a lull of a few months, broke out again worse than ever. In all the counties already named, numerous bodies of unemployed artisans committed great excesses. In Yorkshire several mills were burned down. At Huddersßeld a great number of armed men, with their faces disguised by broad black marks down each cheek and over the forehead, broke into several houses, threatening the inmates with immediate death if they stirred a foot, ransacked all the drawers, and carried off whatever sums of money they found. At Sheffield similar outrages took place. At Stafford the Luddites, from eighty to a hundred strong, broke into houses in search of arms, and after getting what they wanted, left the inmates in a state of terror. At New Radford, near Nottingham, on the morning of the 16th of June, 1816, a fierce attack was made by strong party on the premises of a Mr Wright, and twelve valuable point-net lace machines were broken, in retaliation for the real supposed infringement of some trade regulations. Some of the party were apprehended and tried. Intense excitement thereupon prevailed. The prisoners seemed to have the entire sympathy of their class. The principal ground of defence was an *alibi*, but their safety lay in the court being intimidated. The result was a verdict of acquittal, in the absence of direct and positive proof of guilt. Had it been otherwise, both judge and jury would in all likelihood have been murdered, as the mob, well armed, had complete possession of the court room for hours, and during the progress of the trial and summing up of judge, expressions were given loud utterance to of the most fearful import. When the verdict was announced, the whole place rang again with loud cheers, which were taken by the crowd in the street, and reverberated to the sky. 

On the 20th of November, in the same year, James Towle, stocking-maker, a leading man among the Luddites, was executed at Leicester for the crime of frame-breaking. The offence for which he suffered was committed at Loughborough. Towle had been carefully brought up by honest and industrious parents, who, though in humble life, sent him to one of the best day schools in Nottingham, where he was a schoolfellow with Henry Kirk White. He died like Martyr going to glory.

The Watch and Ward Act was enforced in Nottingham, on and after the 2nd December, 1801, the continued outrages rendering such a step necessary for the protection of life and property, neither the constabulary nor the military being found sufficient. The distress caused by the great changes of employment consequent on the sudden return to peace after twenty years of war, and the disbanding of the immense forces employed so long at sea and on land, had brought about a rapid increase of serious crimes, and the common people having got it into their heads that in every case of class difference or dispute the law was in the wrong, disaffection spread over the land to its utmost borders.

On the 31st of March and 1st of April, 1817, eight men, named respectively Clarke, Savidge, Withers, Amos, Crowther, Mitchell, Towle and Watson, were convicted at Leicester of being concerned in an attempt to shoot a man, named Asher, at Loughborough. Two accomplices, named Blackborne and Burton, were the chief witnesses against them. Blackborne acknowledged that it was himself who fired at Asher, but all his accomplices, except Clark and Watson, who were repreaved, suffered death, while the traitor got off. On the scaffold these men conducted themselves with a firmness seldom witnessed on such a melancholy occasion. They were all tall, well-made, well-dressed, fine-looking fellows, seeming worthy of a better fate. A troop of hussars were in attendance, as well as the yeomanry cavalry, in case any attempt at rescue or disorder should have been made. Happily the whole passed over without interruption. The bodies of the victims, after being cut down, were placed in shells, and put into two carts, in which they were taken for interment to Nottingham, to which neighbourhood they all belonged. The funerals were most affecting scenes.

Nothing, we are told, could exceed the consternation felt in Nottingham upon the fact, first transpiring that such men as Savidge, Mitchell, Crowther, and some others, had been the leading perpetrators of the murders by which Luddism had latterly become distinguished, for they had all been well brought up, and each received a decent education, and were always looked upon, by society in general, as respectable, well-conducted individuals.

The last executions we find on record directly connected with Luddism are those of three men named Brandreth, Turner, and Ludlow, who suffered the last penalty of the law at Derby, on the 7th November, 1817, having been convicted of high treason at a special commission held there on the 15th October previous. Twenty-three Luddites altogether were tried on that occasion, while the bills against twelve were thrown out by the Grand Jury. Several of those convicted were reprieved.

The Luddites were charged with setting fire to Belvoir Castle, though there was not the slightest proof that they had done it. That splendid place, the seat of the Duke of Rutland, was more than half burned down, on the 16th of October 1816, with much plate and many paintings, including "The Nativity," by Sir Joshua Reynolds, valued at three thousand guineas. How the fire originated was, we believe, never known, but most likely it was accidental.

Cobbett wrote several powerful letters to the Luddites, in his *Political Register* for 1816, warning them against the commission of those acts by which they had made themselves infamous, and which he truly told them was not unlikely to throw back the cause of freedom in this country for ever so long. As to their employers, he endeavoured to show them that those circumstances which appeared to them to have arisen from their avarice, had, in fact, arisen from their want of the means, more than from their want of inclination, to afford the people who worked for them competence in exchange for their labours, He demonstrated that their notions hostile to machinery were the result of thoughtlessness; that machinery was not evil, but an advantage; that the labour saved by its use was always available for some better purpose; and that, if the powerful assistance of the wind and water, and steam and clockwork, were thrown aside, we should soon find ourselves making a rapid progress towards the feebleness of savage life. It was heavy taxation, not machinery, he said, that was at the root of their grievances. It was the enormous price the nation was paying for wicked war. It was the sum taken from those who laboured, whether with head or hands, to be given to those who did not labour, which had mainly caused the misery. There can be little doubt but these letters of Cobbett's, animated as they were by good sound sense and kindly feeling, did much to exorcise the evil spirit of machine breaking, as well to spread truer notions of political economy among the working men of the Midland Counties.

---

And now, perhaps, a retelling of the tale of the Yorkshire Luddites:

---

https://archive.org/details/sim_all-the-year-round_1867-05-11_17_420/page/467/mode/1up?q=brandreth
All the Year Round  1867-05-11: Vol 17 Iss 420
Publication date 1867-05-11

> Also appeared as https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000336/18670511/020/0006?browse=true Leeds Times - Saturday 11 May 1867 p6, continued on https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000336/18670511/021/0002 Leeds Times - Saturday 11 May 1867, p2

AN OLD STORY RETOLD  
THE LUDDITES

The Luddite rioters of Nottinghamshire and Yorkshire derive their name from General Lud, their mythical leader, that awe-striking name and title being, however,borne by several of their chiefs at different times and in different districts. The deplorable outrages committed by these men—the breaking into houses to seize fire-arms and obtain money for the purposes of their mischievous and dangerous association—lasted for nearly forty years, during which time, with the exception of a few lulls, the great manufacturing districts were in as disturbed and lawless a state as the Border country when such marauders as Hard-Riding Dick and William of Deloraine drove honest men's cattle, burned keep-towers, and harried farm-houses.

All social diseases have their climax. The night, they say, is darkest just before daybreak. To all miseries and misfortunes there is a culminating period. It was in 1812 that the Luddists were fiercest, maddest, and most desperate, deriding all Philosophy and forgetting all the tenets of political economy in the fierceness of their indignation. Their object was to destroy the new frames which about the end of the last century were introduced (" with, power") to finish woollen goods. Up to this time, cloth had been finished by a tedious and costly process, a man being required to each machine, and three times the  expense being incurred. The machine was a ponderous unsightly instrument, square at the extremity of the blade, but otherwise not unlike the shears used by sheep-shearers, One blade was passed under the balk cloth to be finished, and the other over it, the latter cropping off the nap of the wool as the blades were dexterously pushed, backwards and forwards by the workmen. The men  engaged in this primitive occupation were known by the name of Croppers. The process was as much behind the age as the Hottentot system of spinning is behind the latest processes of Manchester. The croppers, whose occupation was thus interfered with, became as violent as the silversmiths of Ephesus, and were the chief leaders in the Luddite riots. They were generally of the stubborn resolute Yorkshire race; ignorant, violent, determined, holding together for good or ill, and resolved to destroy the new frames, which they believed would throw poor men out of work and starve their families.

There is a wild old Yorkshire legend extant, which pretty well proves the opinion entertained of the croppers by their contemporaries. We give it in the words of a most reliable authority: "The tradition is, that in consequence of their dissipated and wicked ways, all the croppers at their departure hence went to a certain place, that—to describe it negatively—was neither purgatory nor paradise, and that in the course of time they became so numerous in that particularly warm region, and withal so very, very unruly, that the devil was at his wits' end what to do with them, and had no pleasure of his existence in their company. Get rid of them he could not. There they were, and, notwithstanding all remonstrances, declared that they would neither depart nor yet mend their manners. One day, while pondering upon his difficult position, a brilliant idea suddenly occurred to his Satanic Majesty. He knew the fondness of the croppers when on earth for ale, whether good, bad, or indifferent, so he, went to the door of the infernal regions, and bawled out with all his might, 'Ale! ale! ale!' The effect was magical. At the joyful sound the croppers were instantaneously seized with a burning thirst.  They rushed out to a man helter-skelter to where the delightful news came from. No sooner were they safely out than Satan quietly but quickly slipped in, banging the door to and locking it after him, shouting through the keyhole to the astonished and deluded croppers outside, 'Now, d——n you, I have got you out, and I'll keep you out, and I'll take good care no more croppers ever come in here!' And this is stated to be the reason that from thenceforth no more croppers entered the infernal regions."

No Ribbonmen ever banded together with more sullen determination in their movements; their drilling and their attacks were conducted with military precision. Mere agricultural labourers might have shown as much courage, but could not have formed such subtle combinations. Every man had his allotted place by number (as in a regiment) in the musket, pistol, or hatchet, companies. The form of initiation was known by the local name of "twisting in." The oath taken was as solemn and terrible as that used in the secret tribunals of the middle ages. It was as follows:—" I, ——— ———, of my own voluntary will, do declare and solemnly swear that I never will reveal to any person or persons under the canopy of heaven the names of the persons who compose this secret committee, their proceedings,  meetings, places of abode, dress, features, connexions, or anything else that might lead to a discovery of the same either by word, or deed, or sign, under the penalty of being sent out of the world by the first brother who shall meet me, and my name and character blotted out of existence, and never to be remembered but with contempt and abhorrence; and I further now do swear, that I will use my best endeavours to punish by death any traitor or traitors, should any rise up amongst us, wherever I can_find him or them; and though he should fly to the verge of nature, I will pursue him with unceasing vengeance. So help me, God, and bless me to keep this my oath inviolable."

At the time of the crisis of disorder in 1812, when the Luddite conspiracy was netting over the greater part of two counties, Enoch and James Taylor constructed the obnoxious frames in their smithy, which stood on what is now the play-ground of the town school at Marsden. These enterprising men had begun life as common blacksmiths, but by industry, perseverance, and inventive genius, had become known as skilful machine makers. The giant hammer used in the Yorkshire smithies was in 1812 playfully known among the grimy artisans who wielded it, as "Enoch," and when the Luddites made one of their midnight marches to destroy a finishing frame, the cant saying was—alluding to the firm at Marsden and the hammer that was to crush their work,—

"Enoch made them, and Enoch shall break them."

Suffering, and believing that they would suffer more, these impetuous men totally forgot that al] improvements in a trade tend to enlarge that trade; that all lessenings of cost in the production of a fabric tend to increase the sale of that fabric; and that if the finishing-machines reduced the number of croppers, the manufacture of them undoubtedly led to the employment of more hammermen. To these truths they were indifferent; all they knew, was, that the new frames lessened the immediate work for the croppers, and they were determined not merely to destroy those already in use, but to terrify employers from further adopting them.

Yet the croppers themselves, as long as they could get work, were well-to-do men, their wages being twenty-four shillings a week. The Marsden people were, indeed, seldom in distress, for the great cotton trade was already developing, and warp and weft ready for the hand-loom were brought from Lancashire fortnightly and put out to Marsden weavers. But let us be just; the times were hard everywhere, and a shilling did not bring then what it had brought before, and what it brings now. Men worked week in and week out, and only just, after all, kept the wolf from the door. Oh! there was a sharp biting suffering, before thoughtful working men could combine in that thirty years' conspiracy that brought many brave lads to the gallows, and sent many to pine away the rest of their miserable and wasted lives in the dismal restrictions of New South Wales. Time is full of common sense; it brings men to the truth; yet for nearly a whole generation it never stopped these disturbances, erroneous as they were. The man who thinks that the troubles indicated no foregone misery and wrong, would call a dying man's groans and screams mere practical jokes.

The Yorkshire nature is staunch and dogged; it was not going to bear starvation quietly, while proud, arrogant, and often cruel manufacturers were fattening on the cery flesh and blood of the workman and his pining children. The poor man had borne the contemptuous denial of his rights, the incessant suspension of the laws of the land, trade monopolies, tyrannical, stupid, and  heartless governments, civil and religious disabilities, and unjust and useless ways; but dear bread — that was the last straw that broke the camel's back. The artisan saw only in the new machinery means to still further enrich his oppressors and starve himself. When the rich man can be weary of life, is it to be wondered at that the poor man finds life sometimes intolerable? The panacea seemed to be combination. General Lud got recruits in Derbyshire, Lancashire, Cheshire, Nottinghamshire, and especially the south-western districts of Yorkshire. There were food riots at Sheffield, Mansfield, and Macclesfield. Food riots are as certain a proof of something wrong in the body politic, as certain pustules are proofs of small-pox. The stocking-weavers in Nottinghamshire began the bad work by holding nocturnal meetings, by forming secret societies, by appointing delegates and local "centres," by extracting black mail from manufacturers, and requiring implicit obedience in their adherents, after administering an oath. From shattering frames, the Yorkshire men began to talk of upsetting the government, Religion was even pressed into the rioters' service, and a crusading spirit inculcated on those who joined the Luddites. The disorders came to a head in 1812, partly from the lenity shown to Luddite  Prisoners at the Nottingham Assizes in March, and especially by the dreadful price which provisions had then reached. The poor hardly ever tasted nourishing flesh-making wheaten bread; tea and coffee were almost unknown; clothing was extravagantly dear; and the workman had to gain strength for the twelve hours' toil in the bad atmosphere of a mill, from a paltry meal of porridge. All this was hard to bear even with freedom; but it was intolerable in a country where the intellect and conscience of the nation were enslaved, and where the poor had no other privilege than that of paying am undue share of the taxes levied on them by an enormously wealthy intolerably selfish landed interest.

The riots soon overran the West Riding, beginning at Marsden. After trying their destructive powers on a small scale there, the frames at Woodbottom and Ottiwells were marked out for destruction, and the lives of their owners, the Armitages and the Horsfalls, were threatened. These gentlemen took prompt and energetic measures for the protection of their property. A bridge over the river at the Woodbottom Mill had an iron gate placed across the centre which could be securely fastened against all invaders. It had iron spikes at the top, and a row of iron spikes down each side. This bridge—with its gateway and protecting spikes—remained in its original integrity until a very recent day.

"At Ottiwells," adds a local authority, "at the upper end of the road fronting the mill, and on an elevation, level with the present dam, a cannon was planted behind a wall pierced with openings three feet high and ten inches wide. Through these apertures the cannon could be pointed so as to command the entire frontage of the mill, and fired upon an approaching enemy. This somewhat primitive battery still exists, but the artillery disappeared long ago;  and though now walled up, the outlines of the embrasures formerly left for the cannon to be discharged through, may yet be distinctly discerned, In addition to these means of defence, the workmen employed at the mills were armec,  and kept watch and ward during the night."

Mr. Horsfall, resolute and prompt, was not to be easily frightened, and the Marsden croppers were none of them Luddites. The inhabitants of Marsden and the surrounding villages were also compelled to deliver up all fire-arms in their possession, until the reign of terror should pass away.

There were also infantry and cavalry in Marsden. The 10th King's Bays, the 15th Hussars, and the Scotch Greys, were alternately billeted (at quite inadequate rates) in the town, impoverishing and sometimes ruining the landlords, irritating the high-spirited, oppressing the neutral, and contaminating the whole neighbourhood. These regiments were not allowed to remain long in one place, for fear of the men becoming tainted with Luddite opinions. The soldiers marched every night to the market-place at Marsden, and, having been paraded, were then told off into two divisions, the one to patrol on the road to Ottiwells and Valeside, and the other to spend the night between Marsden, Woodbottom Mill, and Lingards. As their movements were well known, and the clash of their swords and the tramp of their horses' feet were to he heard at a long distance at night, it was easy for the Luddites to steal away behind hedges, crouch in plantations, or take by-roads to their work of destruction The cats had belled themselves this time, and the mice could play as they liked. On the 11th of April fire was set to the gunpowder lying above the West Riding. On that day, the croppers at Mr. Wood's mill at Longroyd Bridge, near Huddersfield, were planning a night attack on the mill of a Mr. Cartwright, at Liversedge. The leading conspirator was an impetuous cropper, named George Mellor (twenty-two). His chief lieutenants were Thomas Smith (twenty-three), William Thorpe (twenty-two), and a mean subtle fellow, afterwards an informer, Benjamin Walker (twenty-five). Joshua Dickenson, a cropper, came to the shop on the Saturday before named, and brought a pint of powder, a bag of bullets, and two or three cartridges, to distribute among the Longroyd Mill men. They met at night, about ten o'clock, when it was not quite dark, about three miles from Cartwright's mill, in the fields of Sir George Armitage, at the obelisk (or, as the Luddites quaintly nick-named it, "the dumb steeple"). When more than a hundred men had assembled, Mellor and' Thorpe, the two young leaders, mustered the Luds, and called them over, not by names, but by numbers, in military fashion; there were three companies—the musket, the pistol, and the hatchet companies; the rest carried sledge-hammers, adzes, and bludgeons. They were formed in lines two deep, and William Hale (No. 7), a cropper from Longroyd Mill, and a man named Rigge, were ordered by Mellor to go last and drive the Luds up, and see that no coward stole off in the darkness; for there were many Luds who only joined through fear of being assassinated, and had no heart in the matter. The order to march was at last given, and the band proceeded over wild Hartshead Moor, and from thence into a close sixty yards from Rawfold Mill, where the musket-men put on masks, got ready their fire-arms, and took a draught of rum to cheer them on to the attack. Mellor then formed his company of musketmen into lines of thirteen abreast, and moved on to the doomed mill, followed by Thorpe and his pistol-men.

In the meantime, Mr. Cartwright, who had apprehensions of an attack, was in the great stone many-windowed building. The great waterwheels were still; the only sound was the ripple of the water in the mill-dam. The alarm-bell, rising above the roof, stood out dark against the sky. There was no light at any window, and no noise. The five workmen and their allies, the five soldiers, were asleep. The armed men, intent on destruction and ready for murder to their design stole on like ghosts. Soon after twelve, Mr. Cartwright, who had just fallen asleep, was awoke by the violent barking of a large dog kept chained inside the mill for such a purpose.

The millowner leaps out of bed to give the alarm, and as he opens his bed-room door he hears twenty or thirty of the three hundred panes of glass on the ground floor shattered in; at the same time there is a rattle and blaze of musketry at the ground and upper windows; the bullets whistle, and splinter, and flatten against the inner walls. At the same time a score of sledge-hammers are heard working at the chief door, and voices shouting and threatening at the other entrances, and indeed on all sides, except that on which the mill-pool lies.

The hour is come at last. But Mr Cartwright is Yorkshire too, resolute, bold, and of a good heart. He shouts to his men, and they fly to arms, and load and cock their muskets. He and one or two of his workpeople run to the alarm-bell and pull fiercely at the rope, till it clashes out its summons to the Hussars at Liversedge and friends near or far.

This drives the Luddites stark staring mad; the firing becomes hotter; and a dozen of them cry out:

"Fire at the bell-rope!" "Shoot away the bell!" "D——— that bell! get it, lads!"

(For they knew the soldiers would be on them with their sabres if that bell clang many minutes longer.) Presently the bell-rope breaks, and two mep are sent up to ring and fire alternatively. Cartwright and his men fire from the upper loops of the mill obliquely at the howling crowd that flash off their guns, and ply their hammers, and snap their pistols at the detested mill, where the ten men are glaring at them from under covert. The fire from and against the mill is hot, pelting, and furious.

"Bring up Enoch!" roar stentorian voices.

A big hammerman advances to the door, and pounds at it with Enoch as if it were a block of iron.

The rest shout:

"Bang up, my lads!" "In with you!" "Are you in, my lads?" "Keep close." "In with you, lads!" "D——— them. Kill them, every one!"

Mellor then cries, with horrible imprecations, "The door is opened!"

But it is not. They are wrong this time. Enoch has been hard and heavy at it; it is true, the panels are broken, so that a man's head might go through, but the lock and bolt are not burst yet. The planks are split with hatchets, the malls have broken and chopped it into holes, but the door still keeps faithful and fast. The stone jambs of one entrance are wrenched out, the frameworks are smashed in; still Cartwright and his men keep up their fire from between theflagstones that barricade the upper windows, and some of the Luddites are struck. There is a cry that some one is shot, and a man has fallen on his face. Booth is down, and there is hot blood on Dean's hands. Dean has been shot through the door as he plied his hatchet.

There are only nine panes of glass left in the ground floor; but Enoch has failed this time. The firing has now gone on for twenty minutes, and still flashes to and fro over the mill-pool, from door to window, and from window to door. A man named Walker is looking in at a broken window, when a ball from one of Cartwright's men strikes the edge of his hat. The enraged Luddite instantly leans in and fires at where the flash came from, taking the best aim he can. As he said afterwards :

"I was determined to do it, though my hand was shot off for it, and hand and pistol had gone into the mill."

It is very dark, nothing can be seen on either side but the jet of fire upwards and downwards as the besieged fire from behind the pavings stones, and the Luddites from their platoons.

But now from the clamorous crowd outside came groans and screams; and the mob, either intimidated, dreading the coming sabres, or falling short of powder and ball, began to slacken their fire. That gave the mill people fresh courage, for they knew the Luddites were losing heart. Now the firing entirely ceased, except a shot or two at intervals. The wounded men were groaning with pain, and their comrades were trying to carry them off. The Luddites broke and separated towards Huddersfield; one man fell in the mill dam, others slunk back to the Dumb Steeple Field; a few crept up the beck.

Mr. Cartwright, listening, could hear the heavy groaning of the poor wretches left under the windows wounded, but he was afraid to go out lest it should be afterwards said he had murdered the stragglers in cold blood. Then, the victorious defenders rested and rejoiced, or kept the alarm bell going. On a friend arriving, Cartwright went cautiously out and examined the field of battle, and removed the wounded men to a public-house near. "When the day broke, Cartwright went and examined the ruined mill-- the windows were destroyed, the doors chopped and broken, the paths to Huddersfield strewn with malls, hatchets, and hammers. There was a Luddite's hat floating in a dismal way about the mill dam.

That night many glimpses were obtained of the retreating rioters.

Some of the frightened Luddites were soon tracked. On the night of the attack on Rawfold Mill, a man named Brooks, who was wet through and without a hat, called at High town on a man named Naylor, from whom Mellor, the leading spirit all through this bad affair, borrowed a hat for his coadjutor. On the day after, a woman living at Lockwood saw a great many cloth-dressers come to the house of a man named Brook, whom she heard evidently telling "some sorrowful tale." She could tell that, by the motion of his hand. She heard only a few words, and those were:

"That of all the dismallest dins anybody ever heard, that was the dismallest, and that you might have heard it half a mile, and I had rather be clemmed to death than be in such a stir again."

Before any of the men could be arrested the irritation produced by the failure of the attack on Rawfold's mill had led to a fresh crime. A day or two after the repulse the croppers at Mr. Wood's mill at Longroyd Bridge were talking together, lamenting the loss of life among the Luddites at Cartwright's mill. Mellor, always foremost, then said there was no way of smashing the machinery but by shooting the masters. No one present seems to have protested against this proposition. Mellor, who had been to Russia, had brought back with him a large pistol of a peculiar kind, with a barrel half a yard long. It had been sold to a man named Hall for some pigeons. This pistol was borrowed on the afternoon of the 28th of April. At Hall's house Mellor loaded this pistol so heavily that Hall asked Mellor if he meant to fire that? He thought the piece would jump back. Mellor replied, coolly, "Yes; I mean to give Horsfall that." About five o'clock that day Mellor came into a room at Longroyd Mill, where a man named Walker was at work with three other men, and asked him to go with him and shoot Mr. Horsfall. The man did not then consent; but half an hour after Mellor came again, put a loaded and primed pistol into his hand, and told him he must go with him and shoot Horsfall. Walker examined the pistol, found it nearly full, and consented.

This Mr. Horsfall—the man whom the four Luddites waited for in the narrow strip of a plantation on the Huddersfield road—was an excitable impetuous man, violent in manner, but kind and forgiving to his own workpeople. Against the Luddites, however, he was always implacable. Though he had offered to his neighbours, the Armitages, to pull down the obnoxious frames, he had been heard to express his wish to ride up to the saddlegirths in Luddite blood. The children, as he rode through Lingard's Wood, used to run out and cry,I'm General Lud!" and he would invariably pursue the urchins with his horsewhip. This rash and impulsive man was about forty, and in the full flush of vigorous manhood. It was said that the Luddites had, on the night of the defeat at Rawfold's, tossed up a shilling to settle whether Cartwright's mill or Horsfall's mill should be first attacked.

The other men were in a wood twenty yards nearer Huddersfield. They were to fire after Mellor and Thorpe had fired.

This was at about six o'clock. At about half-past five Mr. Horsfall has mounted at the door of the George Hotel, Huddersfield, rash and defiant as usual, and ridden off. A few minutes after he was out of sight, Mr Horsfall's friend, a Mr. Eastwood, of Slaithwaite, who had often expostulated with the daring and obnoxious millowner on the imprudence of his intemperate language about the Luddites, called at the George to propose, for protection and companionship, to ride home with him. On hearing he had gone, he cantered quickly after him, hoping to overtake him. About six, Mr. Horsfall pulled up his horse at the Warren House Inn, at Crossland Moor. Finding there two of his old workpeople, Mr. Horsfall gave each a glass of liquor in a friendly way. He did not himself alight, but on the saddle tossed off a steaming glass of rum-and-water, and then rode off flushed with the grog. A man named Parr was about a hundred and fifty yards behind him. All the way from Huddersfield there had been an intermittent stream of people returning homeward—farmers in gigs, labourers with carts, and young squires riding gaily back to their country places.

When Mr. Horsfall comes abreast of the plantation, Parr sees four men in dark-coloured clothes stooping about under the boughs. All at once there comes a crack, as of a gun, and a puff of smoke. Mr. Horsfall's horse jibs around, and the rider falls with his face on the horse's neck. Two shots had been fired. By a great effort the wounded man raises himself painfully up by the horse's mane, and calls out "Murder!" At that moment a man in a bottle-green top-coat (one of the four in ambuscade) springs on the wall with one hand and both feet.

Parr riding up, seeing this, called out to the murderer "What, are you not contented yet?" and rode fast up to the wounded man, who was already dripping with blood. Horslall said to the farmer coming so providentially to his assistance:

"Good man, you are a stranger to me, but pray ride on to Mr. Horsfall's house (his brother's), and get assistance. I am shot."

Parr, supporting him in his arms—for he grew sick and faint, and was falling—said :

"Are you Mr. Horsfall, of Marsden?"

As he groaned "I am", the blood spurted from his side, and he fell off his horse.

Parr then drew him to the side of the road, and a clothier named Bannister supported him in his arms till two boys came up with a cart and removed the dying man to the Warren House.

When the surgeon came, he found poor Horsfall's pulse weak, faint, and tremulous, and he was pale and sick. One ball had passed through his left side to his right side, and nearly cut the femoral artery. The other ball had pierced his left thigh. He died in about thirty-eight hours.

A labourer in the adjacent fields, who saw the murder perpetrated, was seized with terror, and fled. Another man, ignorant of the murder, saw four men run and clamber over a wall into Dungeon Wood. In getting over the bars, part of a pistol was seen under one of the men's coat, and the ploughman said to himself :

"There go Luds; we shall have mischief to-night!"

The man (probably Mellor), seeing the pistol was observed, drew his top-coat down over it. Smith and Walker hid their pistols in two ant-hills in the wood, and also Mellor's powder-horn. Mellor and Thorpe then ordered their companions to go Honley way, and gave them two shillings to buy beer. They went on two miles further to Honley, and there drank seven or eight pints of ale. There was a drunken collier there, and the collier, pleased with Smith's excellent whistling, got up and tried to dance. Soon after, some pale frightened men came in from Huddersfield market, and brought word that Mr. Horsfall had been shot, and was lying half-dead at the Warren House.

The next day Walker was sent for by Mellor to come into his shop at Longroyd Mill. Mellor, Thorpe, and Smith then produced a Bible, and ordered him to kiss it, and swear to keep the secret "in all its circumstances." Six other workmen had already been sworn. Mellor had burnt his finger in firing, and it was then bound up, while Thorpe's face had been scratched in running through the plantation.

Mellor and Thorpe's pistols Mellor had left at his cousin's at Dungeon Wood, where the apprentices hid them under some flocks, and after that in the laite. At this house Mellor also left his own bottle-green top-coat and Thorpe's, and took his cousin's drab coat away as a disguise.

The Luddites were now triumphant, and quiet and honest people were frantic with fear. We draw upon our local authority for a picture of the aspect of things at this crisis. There were, however, brave men still resolute and determined. "At Marsden, on the receipt of the intelligence, the authorities, undismayed, prepared for all emergencies, and redoubled their precautions. The headquarters of cavalry were at the house now belonging to Mr. Robert Taylor. It was then the principal inn in the village, and known as the Old Red Lion, kept by a landlord named John Race. The large room still extending over the entire building—now applied to a far different purpose—was converted into barracKs for the cavalry, their horses being kept in the adjoining stables. At Ottiwells, where a portion of the infantry was continually on guard during the night, prompt measures against a probable attack were taken. Watch and ward was maintained by the soldiery and the local constabulary, a strict surveillance was kept over all suspected individuals, and no lights were permitted in any dwellings after nine o'clock in the evening. It was naturally anticipated that Woodbottom Mill and its proprietors would be the next objects of vengeance, and preparations were made to frustrate it. For months past, Enoch and James Taylor had slept in the mill in consequence of their lives being threatened and their own dwellings being unsafe, and they formed part of the mill garrison at night. Their future partner, Arthur Hirst, was the woollen engineer at the mill, and he vigorously laboured to convert the factory into a fortified place, becoming for the time a military engineer. The windows of the first storey were barricaded. The doors and window-shutters were coated inside with sheet iron. All communication between the first and upper storeys could be cut off, and the defenders inside were enabled to fire upon an attacking force from the upper storeys while sheltered themselves. A trap-door on a floor over the water-wheel had been so ingeniously planned by Arthur Hirst, that if the rioters had gained an entrance they would, on touching the flooring, drop through it into the wheel-race below.

Such was the fear of the vengeance of the Luddites, that Mellor and his companions remained undiscovered for nearly a year. Though two thousand pounds (a large sum for poor workmen) was offered for their apprehension, they remained going in and out at Longroyd Mill just as usual, though several dozen men must have known of their guilt. At last, Benjamin Walker, tempted by the reward, betrayed them, and was admitted evidence for the Crown. A special commission was held at York, before Baron Thomas and Judge Le Blanc, for the trial of the Luddites, sixty-four in number, who were concerned in the disturbances in the West Riding. The assizes commenced on Saturday, January 2nd, 1813, and terminated on the 12th of the same month. Amongst the prisoners were three of the murderers of Mr. Horsfall, namely, George Mellor, William Thorpe, and Thomas Smith. The evidence against them was conclusive. The prisoners were defended by Henry, now Lord Brougham. At that day it was a peculiarity of the law in trials for such crimes as the prisoners were charged with, that while their counsel could cross-examine the witnesses for the crown, and examine the witnesses for the defence, they could not address the jury on behalf of the accused. This palpable and cruel injustice no longer exists. Mr. Justice Le Blanc, the presiding judge, summed up the evidence clearly and impartially. At the close of the summing-up the jury retired, and returned in twenty-five minutes, bringing in a verdict of 'Guilty' against all the prisoners, who, upon being asked if they had anything to urge why sentence of death should not be passed upon them, severally declared that they were 'Not Guilty,' Thorpe adding, 'Evidence has been given false against me, that I declare.' Before and after the conviction an impression possessed many minds that Smith was not as culpable as the rest, and that he was as much sinned against as sinning. This feeling was strengthened by the fact that the jury singled him out from the rest, and, the day before the execution, recommended him to mercy; but the recommendation was disregarded. The trial concluded on Wednesday, the 6th of January. In those days death followed quickly upon conviction, and on the Friday following the execution of the three men took place at York. In the short interval between conviction and execution the prisoners were very penitent, yet persistently refused to make any acknowledgment of their guilt. Mellor declared 'that he would rather be in the situation he was then placed in, dreadful as it was, than have to answer for the crime of their accuser (Walker);' adding, that 'he would not change places with him for his liberty and two thousand pounds.' To prevent the possibility of rescue, the place of execution was guarded by a strong force of cavalry and infantry, and at nine o'clock in the morning, in the presence of a vast assemblage of people, the murderers met their doom. Though deeply affected, they made no confession of their guilt. On the Saturday but one following, fourteen more persons were executed at York for crimes of a similar character; a wholesale execution which has since had no parallel in England."

Walker, the informer, was ever after shunned and detested. His ill-earned money did not prosper; he became poor, and in his old age had to apply for parish relief at Huddersfield.

"The members of the firm of Messrs. Abraham and John Horsfall took the death of their son and nephew greatly to heart; and the father, Mr. Abraham Horsfall, from thenceforth appeared to imbibe a dislike to Marsden. The use of the obnoxious machinery was discontinued at Ottiwell's and cropping by hand resumed; and in a few years afterwards their mill property in Marsden was disposed of, Bankbottom Mills passing into the possession of Messrs. Norris, Sykes. and Priestley; and Ottiwells to Messrs. Abraham and William Kinder. It is related that, after his son's death, Mr. Abraham Horsfall never again entered the mill at Ottiwells, and when riding past on his way to Bankbottom, he invariably averted his face from the mill, as if its very sight was hateful and painful to him."

On the 9th of January, Haigh, Dean, Ogden, the three Brooks, Walker, and Hirst were tried for the attack on Cartwright's mill. Haigh, Dean, Ogden, Thomas Brook, and Walker were found guilty and hanged. The rest were acquitted.

After this wholesome severity, the Luddites never made much lead in Yorkshire. The spirit of resistance was roused, leaders were wanting to the rioters, and the better class of workmen began to shrink from combinations that, beginning in destroying machinery, soon ripened into murder.— *All The Year Round.*

`The article then continued as below...`

----


----

https://archive.org/details/sim_all-the-year-round_1867-05-11_17_420/page/473/mode/1up?q=brandreth
All the Year Round  1867-05-11: Vol 17 Iss 420

"ALL THE YEAR ROUND.
A WEEKLY JOURNAL.
CONDUCTED BY CHARLES DICKENS. WITH WHICH IS INCORPORATED HOUSEHOLD WORDS."

p473-4

Brandreth and his treason, terribly expiated on the scaffold at Derby, belongs more to the history of political agitation. The Nottingham riots were not attended with circumstances so interesting as those we have given, and the burning of Messrs. Wire and Duncroft's manufactory at West Houghton, in Lancashire, on the 24th of April, 1812, we have no room to describe here.

The record of the Luddite riots is a black and warning page in the social history of England. It is a melancholy picture of ignorance, of useless crime, and of cruel vengeance, yet it was by such painful and blood-stained steps that the English workman learned the madness and folly of combinations against progress. Cobbett, with his fine vigorous Saxon sense, refuted the arguments of the Yorkshire rioters in his admirable and most useful "Letter to the Luddites." He says:

"To show that machines are not naturally and necessarily an evil, we have only to suppose the existence of a patriarchal race of a hundred men and their families, all living in common, four men of which are employed in making cloth by hand. Now, suppose some one to discover a machine by which all the cloth wanted can be made by one man. The consequence would be that the great family would (having enough of everything else) use more cloth; or, if any part of the labour of the three cloth-makers were much wanted in any other department, they would be employed in that other department. Thus would the whole be benefited by this invention. The whole would have more clothes amongst them, or more food would be raised, or the same quantity as before would be raised, leaving the community more leisure for study or recreation. See ten miserable mariners cast on shore on a desert island, with only a bag of wheat and a little flax-seed. The soil is prolific; they have fish and fruits; the branches or bark of trees would make them houses, and the wild animals afford them meat. Yet, what miserable dogs they are! They can neither sow the wheat, make the flour, nor catch the fish or the animals. But let another wreck toss on the shore a spade, gun, and some fish-hooks and knives, and how soon the scene is changed! Yet they want clothes; and in order to make them shirts, for instance, six or seven out of the ten are constantly employed in making the linen. This throws a monstrous burden of labour on the other three, who have to provide the food. But send them a loom, and you release six out of the seven from the shirt-making concern, and ease as well as plenty immediately succeeds. In these simple cases the question is decided at once in favour of machines."

These arguments are irrefutable, and may be thus summarised: Improved machinery lowers the price of production. The cheaper a fabric is, the greater is the demand for it, and it at once undersells the fabric produced without machinery. Where the demand for a certain fabric increases, more hands are of course employed. Younger persons can work at machinery than at handicrafts where strength is required. Suppose machinery abolished in Lancashire: that would not prevent its being employed elsewhere. The wife and children would be thrown out of work by the stopping of the lighter machinery. The husband and father, having to support his family alone, requires higher wages. Prices are raised to meet this drain for more wages. Trade again flows to the cheaper market. The trade in the non-progressive or riotous places dwindles. Fewer workmen are required; down go wages; and Poverty, Famine, and Death, those cruel teachers of pelitical economy, creep into the half-deserted factories, and push the workmen from their seats into the graves that have long been gaping at their feet.

In February, 1812, Mr. Ryder brought in a bill rendering frame-breaking a capital offence. The act passed.


---



Cobbett Letters to luddites

https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2016/11/30th-november-1816-letter-to-luddites.html


Nottingham curfew 1811
https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2011/12/5th-december-1811-nottingham-under.html



And what of 1817? The trial of Loughbourough Luddites, and the Pentrich Revolution?

---
https://archive.org/details/sim_all-the-year-round_1874-06-06_12_288/page/182/mode/1up?q=pentridge
All the Year Round  1874-06-06: Vol 12 Iss 288


LEGENDS AND TRADITIONS OF ENGLISH COUNTIES NOTTINGHAMSHIRE: BRADNRETH, "THE NOTTINGHAM  CAPTAIN."—THE INSURRECTION AT PENTRIDGE AND BUTTERLEY.

IN TWO CHAPTERS. CHAPTER I.

In the year 1817, hard times and the popular discontent at Tory rule and the Tory reaction after the final victory of Waterloo, began to culminate. This angry restlessness at the Tory resistance to reform rose to its highest pitch, as might have been expected; not in the fat agricultural southern counties, where the labourers were as stupid as draught oxen and about as much their own masters; but in the midland and the northern counties, where skilled workmen congregated to discuss their intolerable grievances, and dreamt of some remedy, however desperate. The Prince Regent's vicious and selfish life had given a point to the demagogues of the day, and there is no doubt that "the first gentleman in Europe" was as much detested by the Radical mechanics of Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire, as if he had been a Tiberius in iniquity and a Nero in cruelty. To drive this discontent to some tangible shape, Lord Liverpool sent among those restless, turbulent, and ignorant, but sincere men, spies who were paid to urge them to open rebellion. Once in arms, Liverpool knew that he had the power to check all such troublesome reformers by blow of sword, or shock of bullet. In this mischievous and unrighteous way the malcontents were led to their ruin and their death. Of Brandreth, alias "the Nottingham Captain," who led this rising of 1817, little is known; but, according to local Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire tradition, he was a man of great power and energy, who in these dark times loomed suddenly like a giant on the horizon. In foolish Richard's time he might have been a Wat Tyler or an Artevelde. But coming in the Wellington epoch, he arose a mere ugly spectre to warn the coronetted obstructives of the danger of the eternal stagnation of Conservatism.

This petty revolution of two days assumed a visible form on Sunday morning the 8th of June, 1817, on the borders of Derbyshire, especially at Pentridge and Butterley. Early on that morning some iron founders, who had come from the iron works at Butterley to Pentridge on some gardening business, entered parlour of the White Horse in that place, and were astonished to find the room full of excited people (about forty), all gathered round a stern man in a brown great-coat and grey trousers, who sat at a central table, pointing out with his finger places on a map which lay before him. He was a stern, savage-looking fellow, and talked undisguised treason of the most outspoken and gory character. A fine young man with a florid complexion, named George Weightman, seemed to act as special henchman and aide-de-camp to Brandreth, "the Nottingham Captain," as this rebel leader was generally called by his followers; and near him stood another active adherent, a man afterwards hung and beheaded. Brandreth, whom every the new comer questioned as to their movements, repeatedly declared that nothing could be done till the Government was overthrown. Brandreth was pointing out to the workmen present the places (marked with crosses) on the canvas-lined map where their friends had agreed to assemble on the Monday night at dusk. The Pentridge people were to meet at Pentridge, the Wingfield people near a stone quarry. Others were to fall in at the border of Nottingham Forest at two on Tuesday morning as they marched on Nottingham. Brandreth promised also risings at Sheffield and Manchester and all at the same hour, ten o'clock on the Monday night.

Presently William Turner (another comrade of Brandreth, afterwards executed with him), came in and asked the Pentridge people for the list of their guns and pikes. On being told none had yet been made out, he said that his parish, Wingfield, was more forward than Pentridge, as they had noted down every gun, pistol, and sword in the parish, and had forty pikes to spare hid in a stone quarry. He then asked where the guns at Butterley were, and said that they must go and demand them, and if they were not quietly given up they must go in and take them. Then Brandreth, to whom every one appealed as to the hour of marching, the general rising, and the way of obtaining arms, recited the following verses of his own in a wild excited way—

Every man his skill must try,  
He must turn out and not deny;  
No bloody soldier must he dread,  
He must come out and fight for bread;  
The time is come, you plainly see,  
The Government oppos'd must be.

A man named Joseph Weightman was then sent off to Nottingham (fourteen miles distant), to see how their friends went on, money being first collected round the room for his expenses. This scout of the rebels carried a letter written by Brandreth. A man named Mac Kerswick then said, looking round the room, that he thought there were too many there for that business, and soon after went out, as if alarmed at the conspirators' daring.

In the course of this wild talk William Turner said, "The fact was, the badger must be drawn, and when he ran out, they would shoot him."

"In my own parish, Wingfield," Turner went on to say, "we have got some little vermin to kill, and we must kill them before we leave.""

Upon this, Anthony Martin, an iron worker from Butterley, who had dropped into the White Horse with a friend by accident, remarked "that they should mind, for there were constables in the room, himself and a man named Shirley Asbury," upon which Brandreth's men threatened to cram the two constables up the chimney. Brandreth, too, swore they would shoot any one that opposed them, or any one that said anything about them. The men present were iron founders, stocking makers, and field labourers, and all listened eagerly to the "Nottingham Captain." The rebels, confident of success, swore that every village should kill its own vermin, for that farm-yard metaphor seemed to exactly hit their fancy. They particularly spoke of firing straw before the door of Colonel Halton, a magistrate at Wingfield, and shooting him when he came out. Then they were to march on and meet Sheffield and Chesterfield at Butterley. There they had planned to kill Mr. Jessop, Mr. Goodwin, and Mr. Wragg, of the iron-works there, and to take were several men near the mysterious possession of the place. At Nottingham, Brandreth said there would be plenty of men and a hundred guineas each for them. It would be like a journey of pleasure, and they would after that go down the river (probably the Trent), and carry the game further. Brandreth, staunch to business and indifferent to loud chatter and vapouring rant, now wanted a barrel of gunpowder, that he might show the Pentridge men the way to make cartridges, the desire to possess and to burn which seemed fast spreading in this amiable society. Now and then he drew a favoured man aside, and talked with him under breath, and so the lava began to creep and creep from the crater.

On Monday night, the ninth of June, about half-past eight,a labourer of Southwingfield, named Shipman, was standing at the door of the house where he lodged. Brandreth, George Weightman, and some others came up, and Shipman, knowing Weightman, asked him where they were going. Weightman replied, "To an old barn up in the field, where there was to be a meeting of the towns of Wingfield, Critch, Pentridge, and Alfreston. There were arms and powder there, and more would be found on the way to Nottingham. A band of music and thousands of friends were to meet them at Nottingham forest. There would be plenty of churches along the road to get lead from for bullets. At Nottingham there would be bread, beef, and half a pint of rum for every man."

"But what about the poor women and children?" cried Shipman.

Brandreth said that a provisional government would be formed in London, and sent down to the country to relieve the wives and children of those who had gone on the march.

An old woman standing by tapped Brandreth on the shoulder at this, and said, "My lad we have got a magistrate here."

Brandreth replied, "Ah! but you will soon have a different one from your one, that will allow you plenty." And went on to say that England, Ireland, and France were all to rise that night at ten o'clock, and the northern clouds would come and sweep all before them, and every man that refused to go should be shot on the spot.

This conversation took place opposite the meeting-house at Southwingfield, very nar to Colonel Halton's gate. There were several men near the mysterious "Nottingham Captain" at the time, and all of them (strange to say) carried guns; and William Turner began loading his piece with bullets as he walked on to what seemed a rendezvous at Hunt's barn, a lonely, disused place in a field of Colonel Halton's.

"Come, lads," cried George Weightman; "I expect an engagement very soon with Jessop's men at Butterley furnace."

Thomas Turner, a man to whom Brandreth had promised a good gun if he  marched with them, then asked William Turner who the stranger (Brandreth) was, to which Turner replied—

"Our captain from Nottingham."

About a hundred yards further, astonished Turner saw about a score of men pour out of the at first apparently deserted old barn. They all carried, Turner could see, as they approached, pikes, swords, or guns. On Weightman's deciding to meet the Pentridge people in the field of a man named Topham, Brandreth marshalled the men into ranks; and Thomas Turner had a bag of bullets given him to carry, as he preferred that passive occupation to carrying a gun. The next step was to go round to hostle houses and obtain arms by fair means or foul.

One of the first demands for arms was made at the house of a farmer named Tomlinson, at Southwingfield. We gather from his evidence at Brandreth's trial, at Derby, the following particulars:—

Henry Tomlinson deposed "that on Monday night, the ninth of June, about half-past nine, or a quarter before ten, a man came to him from Mr. Hardwick's house—it is not a quarter of a mile. He gave him some information, in consequence of which he locked the house door and went out with his wife into the yard; they staid there about ten or fifteen minutes before he saw anybody come, then a body of men came to the house, and came in at one end of the yard; there appeared to him to be between thirty and forty, some of them were armed with pikes, and some with guns; the pikes were such as he saw then on the table. When they came to the door, they began to rattle it; he asked them what they wanted; they said, 'You and your gun.' He does not know whether the prisoner was there; he said they should have neither; he had a gun, but it was gone to Ashover to be mended. The person whom they called captain asked for him and his gun, but it was too dark to see his person.

The captain said if he did not open the door they would break it; that they would search the house. As the witness was going up to the door, he saw William Turner, he also saw William Barker, and he said to each of them 'Are you one, William ?' and both of them said 'Yes.' He unlocked the door, and went in, and the captain and another man followed him. He had left his gun on the bed tester; he brought it down, the captain demanded it from him, and he delivered it to him; the captain took it out of doors, and he went and stood close to the door, and the captain said, 'You must go along with us.' He said he would not go, they said he must go— he had better go that night than stop till morning; that if he stopped till morning, there was a great gang coming from Sheffield, and a great cloud out of the North, which would sweep all before it. He said he would not go that night, that if he must go, he would stay till the morning; and then the captain cocked his gun, and presented it at him, and swore he would shoot him if he would not go. Then he said, 'No, no, I will not stand out; I will go a little way, but it shall not be far.' Before the captain threatened to shoot him some cried out, 'Smite his head off;' others cried, 'Let him go,' and others said, 'Never mind him;' then he says the captain said they were going to Nottingham, and must be there between eight and nine o'clock; that it would not be necessary to go further than Nottingham, for London would be taken before they got there. The witness said to George Weightman, 'Are you one?' and he said 'Yes.' He said he thought it a very hard thing to take him from that
lonely place, and to leave his wife behind; he said, 'It is to go a little way, and you may turn back again.' and they gave him a pike like one of those on the table; he asked them to let him carry his own gun, the captain said he should not, and they gave him a pike. He went about three hundred yards with them, and then George Weightman bid him give him the pike, and he did, and got home."

At the farm of Mrs. Hepworth, in Southwingfield Park, the first blood was shed; in fact, a cold-blooded murder was committed. At the trial, this farmer's wife deposed the following:—

"I occupy a farm in Southwingfield Park. On the ninth of June last, at night, one son, two daughters, two men servants, and myself, were the family in the house. My family were disturbed that night by a large number thundering at the door, demanding my guns and servants. In consequence of that I got up and went down-stairs, and called out 'The door is not to be opened,' for I would not part with the men and guns. They afterwards attacked the windows on both sides of the house; the kitchen-window towards the back of the house was broken, I did not see by whom; the shutters were forced into the middle of the room, and they broke the glass quite out, and it fell both ways; myself, my son William, my daughter Emma, and two men servants, Robert Fox and Robert Walters, were all in the kitchen. The people on the outside of the house said to my son William, 'We must have your guns and your men, or we will blow your brains ont.' After the window was broken they fired immediately. Robert Walters was shot dead almost instantly; he died in a few minutes after he received the wound. He was sitting down on a chair, opposite the window, as I thought, to put on his boot; he was shot in the right side of the neck. They still went on demanding the guns."

Directly the kitchen window fell in, and the cruel shot was fired, Mrs. Hepworth said to her small and frightened garrison—

"We must give up the guns, or we shall all be murdered."

A gun, which had been hid away in the cellar for safety, was then eagerly fetched up and delivered to Brandreth, who had himself fired the murderous shot; but the stubborn farmer's wife still refused the men.

"You shan't have the men," she cried; "you have shot one already."

Brandreth's party replied, "We will serve you the same, unless you let us have the other man."

They did not, however, commit any more acts of violence; but after they were gone, the reassured men at Hepworth's found several large stones near the door, and a pike, which had been used to drive the door in.

Elijah Hall's was another house (about a quarter of a mile from Langley Park) which the Brandreth party attacked at Southwingfield. Elijah had returned home from his mill that Monday night about eleven p.m. Ten minutes after he heard footsteps at the door. Presently rough voices asked if any men had been there that night for guns; and, to get "shut" of them, Hall slyly answered that some men had been before, and taken away all the guns he had. The party then went away; but, five minutes after, some thirty men, armed with guns and pikes, came into the yard, and demanded muskets; when he denied that he had any fire-arms. They told him that he had better deliver them quietly, or the house would be fired, and he would lose his life. All this time poor Elijah was trembling in the courtyard, locked out by his own garrison, who had turned the key when the good man ventured forth to parley. He was told by the besiegers that he had better open the door. Rushes were then made at the door; but, these failing, they cried out to Brandreth, "Captain, how must it be?" An order was then bellowed to fire at the door, if it was not opened at once. The garrison, upon that, came to terms, a window was opened, a gun handed out, and the door was opened. Brandreth then insisted that Elijah Hall should go with them; but Hall resolutely refused. One of the party, however, cried, "He has sons." And Brandreth said, "If he has sons, we will have them." They told Hall that they wanted a bigger loaf and the times would be altered. The Nottingham Captain and about a dozen others then went into the house.

As they pushed in, Brandreth said to Elijah—

"I'll blow your brains out, if you don't get your sons up quickly."

On Hall's saying he would not give them up, Brandreth cursed him, gave him two pushes with the muzzle of his gun, and, on his still refusing, presented his gun, and, on a third refusal, cocked it. But William Turner cried, "Don't;" and others cried, "We will fetch them out of bed ourselves." Brandreth then lit a candle at the fire and went up-stairs, rummaging about with his men. There was a great noise and wrangle, till they descended, bringing Elijah's boys, partly dressed; but they found no more guns, though there were several concealed. On Hall asking the captain whither he was bound, he replied with frankness—

"To Nottingham, which would be taken by that time, as there was a general rising throughout the country; and it was their intention to wipe off the National Debt, and begin all fresh. They should pull down the Parliament House, and break up the old laws."

The rioters were formed two deep, and sergeants had been appointed to command the different divisions. At the Bull Hill, at the end of Pentridge, they were halted a quarter of an hour, and near the meeting-house Brandreth fired his gun, to warn the Ripley and Butterley people. James Weightman had a hat full of bullets. As the Captain's little army knocked at many doors and truculently demanded arms, and at one house took out a pony, to mount a messenger for Nottingham.

At Butterley, Brandreth and his men halted at the furnace gate of Mr. Jessop's iron-works, and knocked; on Mr. Goodwin, the managing clerk, coming out, Brandreth told him he wanted his men. In his evidence at the trial, Mr. Goodwin deposed—

"We had, before Monday the ninth of June, many of our men sworn in as special constables—about a hundred of them; the neighbourhood was in a very disturbed state," he says. "I brought my men together on the night of the ninth of June, and I kept them at Ripley till day-light in the morning. In the course of the night I heard guns fired, horns blowing, shouts and different noises throughout the night at a distance; the first shot I heard was about twelve o'clock; we had seen and heard noises before in the villages; it appeared as if there was something very unusual going on. I apprehended that our works would be attacked when daylight came," this being in June, "the greater part of my men went home, the others, twelve or thirteen, stayed at the works." . . . "When they came to the door of the foundry, Brandreth gave them the word, 'halt, to the right face, front,' and they did so. The prisoner had a gun in his hand, a pistol in a belt like an apron, twisted round; the men formed a sort of curved line opposite the gate; the prisoner knocked at the gates with the butt end of his gun; I asked him, 'What do you want, what is your object here?' He said, 'We want your men.' I said, 'You shall not have one of them. You are too many already, unless you were going for a better purpose. Disperse, depend upon it the law will be too strong for you; you go with halters round your necks, you will all be  hanged'— the prisoner made no reply to this."

After an episode at the Butterley Iron Mills, where Brandreth was boldly confronted, the rebels marched round the works, and, returning to the turnpike-road, made straight for Ripley Town End, where they halted and shouted three times, to summon the Heage and Belper people, from whom a detachment was expected. They then moved on to Cudnor, on the high road to Nottingham; and from thence to Langley Mill, where they forced a gun and a recruit from Mr. Raynor. At Langley Mill they met George Weightman returning from Nottingham; and, as he rode along the ranks, he replied to several questions about the state of things in Nottingham, by saying all was going on well: the soldiers kept quiet in barracks; the town was taken, and all they had to do was to march forward.

A little before twelve on the same night as these various events occurred, namely, Monday, the ninth of June, 1817, William Roper, a man who lived in the stand at the race-course, in the centre of Nottingham Forest, three quarters of a mile from Nottingham, was returning to his home from the town, was warned of danger, and soon after saw about a hundred men, armed with poles and pikes, standing in a line, two deep. As Roper and the man who had warned him were hurrying off the race-course to escape these men, ten of them followed Roper and his friend, and brought down their pikes to the charge to stop them. Roper reached his house with his friend, and soon after the men drew up under the stand, as if waiting for something. They knocked at Roper's door, and demanded fire-arms. Roper owned he had some, but told them he would not deliver them up; and they told him, if he did not, they should be under the necessity of breaking open the door and taking them by force.

"If you do so," cried Roper, "I will blow out the brains of the first man that enters."

They replied, "Will you?" and a man (probably Brandreth) then shouted for the men with the fire-arms to come forward. It must have been an anxious moment for Roper. There was a bustle on the flagstones under the race-stand piazzas before his door; but, nevertheless, no attempt was made to force an entry. They merely asked what fire-arms he had, and learning that he had a rifle piece and a fusee, they asked him to give it them or sell it to them, and at the last refusal marched quietly on.

https://archive.org/details/sim_all-the-year-round_1874-06-13_12_289/page/n11/mode/2up?q=pentridge


All the Year Round  1874-06-13: Vol 12 Iss 289

LEGENDS AND TRADITIONS OF ENGLISH COUNTIES.

NOTTINGHAMSHIRE: BRANDRETH, "THE NOTTINGHAM CAPTAIN." — THE INSURRECTION AT PENTRIDGE AND BUTTERLEY. IN TWO CHAPTERS. CHAPTER II.

At the trial, Henry Hole, of Pentridge, deposed the following—

"I asked Brandreth's men where they were going to; 'to Nottingham,' they said; I said I could not pretend to go with them, I had no money to carry me there, nobody to take care of my family while I was gone; they said I needed no money, I should be kept on roast beef and ale, and there were people fixed to take care of everybody's family, who would come in two days or under; they said I had better go with them that night than stop till morning, for they were coming from Yorkshire like a cloud, and would drive all before them, and those that refused to go would be shot. I then dressed myself and went out, and a pike was forced upon me. I said I was not able to carry that pike, if they were going as far as Nottingham; that they must either take it, or I must hurl it down, and one of them took it. . . .  As we approached Eastwood, I had some conversation with James Barnes; he said they were going to Nottingham; that they had fixed a fresh government at Nottingham, and were going thither to defend it; it will soon be all over, for by a letter I saw yesterday, the keys of the Tower would be given up to the Hampton club party, if they were not already; he said, 'I have never sat down five minutes at once since four o'clock yesterday morning; I have been providing guns, pikes, and ammunition ;' in the course of the conversation, Barnes said they were going to stay at Nottingham till other counties came into their measures; at Eastwood, the men appeared again disordered, and Brandreth the captain, the prisoner, ordered them again into the ranks; I turned out of the ranks and stood at some distance, and the prisoner came to me and ordered me into the ranks again. I said, 'I will not go in again for you or any other man.' He came up to me, cocked the gun, and said if I did not go in again immediately, he would shoot me in a moment. I stepped up to him with the knife (which he had described before) in my hand, held it over his neck, and said, if he offered to level his gun at me I would hack his head off; he turned off from me, and I walked off down the turnpike road, as if toward Langley Mill; when I was about fifty or sixty yards off I heard a cry of 'Do not shoot,' I turned round and saw Brandreth with a gun on his shoulder, pointing to me, and at the same time I saw a man of the name of Thomas Turner, take hold of him, and turn the gun off."

In the course of the trial the proprietor of the iron-works at Butterley deposed—

"I observed in the ranks some persons whom I knew; I saw Ludlam the elder, he was armed with a spear; James Taylor, a nephew of Isaac Ludlam's, he was armed with a gun; Isaac Moore, he was armed with a fork; they were all three together in the front rank. I said to Isaac Ludlam, 'Good God, Isaac, what are you doing upon such a business? you have got a halter about your neck; go home.' I took him by the shoulder and pushed him towards the office. I told him if he had any regard to his family or country to go home. I was then in the ranks close to him; he might have taken refuge in our office at that time. He said, 'I am as bad as I can be, I cannot go back, I must go on;' he was exceedingly agitated when I talked to him, and neither of the three took refuge in our office, but others who were there did; Mr. Hugh Booth and Mr. William Booth's servant, and a Turner of Pentridge-lane, and got into the office, and I sheltered them; alter a short pause, and looking at each other, the prisoner gave the word, 'March,' and they marched on towards Ripley; they went first over the coke hearth and then came back again, and finally went towards Ripley. Shortly after they were gone I observed another body of men, amounting to forty or fifty; they did not come so near as the office; sometime after they were gone I saw William Weightman, George's brother, on horseback, another man of the name of Taylor was with him, the brother of Weightman's wife; they were going towards Nottingham; he followed in the same line that the others had gone, but he went a more direct way to Nottingham; I pushed out and took hold of his bridle and stopped him, I said, 'You are going to join those fellows ;' he admitted he was going to join them, and said, if I would let him go back he would go home and not go near them.' He resisted at first, saying that I had no right to stop him on the highway; he turned his horse's head, and when he went to a little distance I observed he had a bag under him. He was dressed in a blue smock frock which concealed the bag before; it struck me when he turned, and I saw it, that that bag must be bullets, and then I dashed at his horse and seized it by the bridle; I told him I must have that bag; he said I should not, I had nothing to do with it. I said, I have, you rascal, they are bullets, and you are taking them to join the rebels.' I took him by the collar and was pulling him down from his horse, and he said he would give them up quietly, that they were bullets; he was obliged to do it, he said, for they had threatened his life if he did not. I found about eighty-four pounds of bullets in the bag, and an instrument for making cartridges with them."

From Codnor it was proved that Brandreth and his men had proceeded towards Langley Mill; in their way between Codnor and Langley Mill they called at the house of a person called Sterland, and insisted upon arms; and three persons having secreted themselves in a barn belonging to that house, and hearing this noise, and watching the party, inadvertently came out of this barn before they had all gone by; they were seen by the prisoner, Turner, and others of the conspirators, and William Turner was most active in endeavouring to force these persons into the ranks; and so far from having any compunction at the unfortunate act they had committed at Mrs. Hepworth's, it was now used by Turner as an inducement to these persons to come into their wicked designs and join their party; for he intimated to them they would follow the fate of that unfortunate person at Mrs. Hepworth's, if they attempted to oppose the design they had in view. They then proceeded to the house of a person of the name of Raynor, where the greatest resolution was displayed by the young, Mr. Raynor, for he opposed their designs, although threatened in the most violent manner; he disregarded their threats, threats referring to the unfortunate and melancholy transaction at Mrs Hepworth's.

But the bubble was soon to burst. The rising was but a nine hours' wonder. Revolutionists are always sanguine. The country did not rise in its thousands as such resolute fanatics as the Nottingham Captain had felt confident it would. On the ninth there was a ground swell of excitement at Nottingham, and groups of irresolute people collected in the streets, and the faces of rich men's wives and children grew pinched and pale and anxious; but after all, the lightning of an injured people's wrath fell not. At half past six a.m. on tho tenth the Tory gentry, encouraged by the failure of the insurrection, rose sword in hand. Lancelot Rolleston, of Watnall, an active county magistrate, mounted and rode early on the dangerous road towards Eastwood. He found the people alarmed, gathered on the road outside their houses, and conscious of some coming evil.

A quarter of a mile from Eastwood the magistrate's keen eye observed in the distance a body of rough men on foot armed with pikes. He instantly turned his horse and spurred off to the nearest barracks for troops. At the barracks he found Mr. Mundy and Mr. Kirkly, both fellow Nottinghamshire magistrates, conferring, and he at once procured eighteen men of the fifteenth Hussars, commanded by Captain Philips and a subaltern, and marched on Eastwood. When he and the Hussars had jolted and jingled as far as Kimberley, four miles from Nottingham, and about two from Eastwood, the country people they met informed them that the rioters had gradually dispersed and the recruits stolen away; and as the Hussars dashed on to Eastwood after them, they came on a litter of guns and pikes, the debris of the scattered rioters. Half a mile from Eastwood the chivalrous Rolleston and one dragoon dashed off down a turning to the left after a party of thirty or forty pikemen whom they saw dispersing in the distance and throwing away their arms that impeded their flight. They captured two or three, then turned to Eastwood, and rejoined the main body of Hussars. Between Langley Mills and Eastwood the soldiers came on another body of men, mostly armed. There was a man (probably the staunch Brandreth) trying to form them by motions of his hand; but the men had lost heart; they were disorderly and disregarded him, and presently all but five or six fled, and the rest, with arms still in their hands, were ridden down and taken. At Eastwood the soldiers met the high sheriff with the Nottinghamshire yeomanry in hot pursuit of the insurgents. Near Langley Mills Thomas Hallowes of Glapwell Hall, the high sheriff, captured the Turners and several other insurgent leaders. Brandreth, subtle and determined, was not captured till the twenty-second of July, when he was taken by the Nottingham constables. George Weightman, of Pentridge, was found at Sheffield, and Isaac Ludlam, the elder, near Uttoxeter. Both were captured by Messrs. Fletcher, Booth, and Laster, natives of Pentridge. Two others were captured at St. Ives, in Huntingdonshire, after a desperate resistance.

In Derby town repressive measures were also put in force. The Rev. Charles Stead Hope, mayor of the borough, and others, were assisted by the aldermen, Messrs. Ledger and Lowe: a company of the Ninety-fifth Regiment was on duty all the night of June nine, and the next day; two troops of Derbyshire Yeomanry, under Major Sir R. Wilmot, of Chaddesden, arrived in the town. The Calke and Ashburn yeomen were called out and sent towards Langley-bridge, and were there joined by the Chestertield troop under Captain Wright.

Jeremiah Brandreth, alias John Coke, alias "The Nottingham Captain," was tried, with eighteen of his men, before a special commission, in the Old County Hall, at Derby, on 16th of October. This man, as resolute as Wat Tyler and as unfortunate, preserved a stern ferocity; but, towards the close of the trial, he grew deadly pale, yet still made great efforts to answer important questions with a ghastly smile. The judges at this trial were Sir Richard Richards, Sir Robert Dallas, Sir Charles Abbot, and Sir George Holroyd. Copley was among the counsel for the crown; while Denman and Cross appeared for Isaac Ludlam, one of Brandreth's companions. It was in the course of the trial of Ludlam that Denman quoted, apropos of Brandreth, Byron's powerful lines in the Corsair, which were thought very applicable to this determined ring-leader.

But who that chief? His name on every shore  
Is famed and feared—they ask and know no more.  
With these he mingles not but to command—  
Few are his words, but keen his eye and hand.

His name appals the fiercest of his crew,  
And tints each swarthy cheek with sallower hue;  
Still sways their souls with that commanding art  
That dazzles—leads—yet chills the vulgar heart.  
What is that spell, that thus his lawless train  
Confess and envy—yet oppose in vain?  
What should it be, that thus their faith can bind?  
The power, the nerve, the magic of the mind!  
Link'd with success—assumed and kept with skill,  
That moulds another's weakness to his will—  
Wields with their hands— but still to these unknown,  
Makes even their mightiest deeds appear his own.  
Unlike the heroes of each ancient race,  
Demons in act, but gods at least in face,  
In Conrad's form seems little to admire,  
Though his dark eyebrows shades a glance of fire;  
Robust, but not Herculean—to the sight  
No giant frame sets forth his common height;  
Yet on the whole—who paused to look again,  
Saw more than marks the crowd of common men.  
They gaze and marvel how—and still confess  
That thus it is, but why they cannot guess.  
Sun-burnt his cheek—his forehead high and full,  
The sable curls in wild profusion veil;
There breathe but few whose aspect could defy  
The full encounter of his searching eye;  
There was a laughing devil in his sneer,  
That raised emotions both of rage and fear;  
And where his frown of hatred darkly fell,  
Hope withering fled—and Mercy sighed farewell!

The trial ended with Brandreth, Turner, and Ludlam being sentenced to death for high treason.

It is uncertain, after all, whether this remarkable and mysterious man, Brandreth, was an Irishman or a Devonshire man. It is supposed that he had been alternately a drover, a whitesmith, a sailor, and a stocking maker. By the advice of the debtors in the Derby prison, he resolutely maintained to the last that he had fallen a victim to the machinations of Oliver, the Government spy.

On being pressed to disclose his motives for the course which he took, Brandreth said that was a matter between himself and his Maker, to whom he had already opened his heart. He wished that no question might be asked him which would involve others. He was answerable for the crimes he had himself committed, and hoped he should die as became a Christian. With regard to the murder of Mrs. Hepworth's servant, that he did not seem to view in the light of a crime. He appeared to think himself rather as a general officer, who had been assigned a certain duty, in the furtherance of which he had to This accounts for his expressions when up-braided with the act at the time, by Thomas Turner—" It was my duty" he said. Throughout, in fact, he seems to have had no consciousness of moral guilt, but viewed his offences entirely as political. His mind was at all times cool and collected, his answers to questions quick and apposite; the tones of his voice were deep and sonorous, and not unpleasing. He was evidently much hurt when viewed as a mere object of idle curiosity, and looked sternly in the faces of those who occasionally gazed upon him. The language of kindness always, however, softened the asperity of his manner. His pipe was his constant solace and companion, and when not engaged in prayer, he engaged himself in writing on the blank pages of the list of witnesses who were subpoenaed on his trial, and with which he had been furnished. This led to a belief that he was writing the history of his life. His writings consisted only of prayers of his own composition, composed with great energy.

When asked whether he had any reason to allege why sentence of death should not be passed upon him, he replied, "Let me address you in the words of our Saviour: 'If it be possible, let this cup pass from me; but not my will, but the Lord's be done.'" The other three men who had been tried, expressed a hope for the mercy of the court.

The terrible execution of this chief of the insurgents took place in Nun's Green, opposite the Derby County Gaol, a few days after the trial. Brandreth entered the prison chapel that morning with his usual indifference. The service over, he tumbled himself on the sledge that was to drag him round the prison-yard, calling out, "You must hold my hand, or I shall fall off." He took Turner by the hand in the prison-passage, and the two men kissed each other. While Ludlam was being drawn round the yard, Brandreth said to Turner—

"Well, we shall now soon be above the sky, where there will be joy and glory for ever and ever."

"Yes," cried Turner, with enthusiasm; "there will be no sorrow there; all will be joy and felicity."

The chaplain, who stood by, encouraged these thoughts; Isaac Ludlam said nothing, but prayed by himself. Brandreth said he was quite ready to die, and felt no fear at all. He mounted the steps first, preceded by the executioner and his assistant. As he trod the scaffold, he said, "God bless you all, but Lord Castlereagh." When Turner came up, he exclaimed wildly, "This is all Oliver and the Government; the Lord have mercy on my soul!" When Isaac Ludlam ascended the ladder, and the rope was dropped over his head, he uttered the following prayer—

"O Lord, forgive my sins, receive my soul, and grant that I may meet all this great concourse of people in heaven. Bless the king of this nation, bless the people, bless all the people, high and low, rich and poor, bond and free; yea, bless all, from the king upon his throne down to the meanest subject in the realm, and may this awful dispensation be made a blessing to thousands, and tens of thousands. O Lord, receive my spirit."

The three men then repeated the Lord's Prayer with the chaplain; Ludlam was still praying aloud when the bolt was drawn. After the bodies had hung half an hour, sawdust was strewn on the platform, and a bench, a block, two axes, two sharp knives, and a basket were brought up. The bodies were then cut down and laid on a bench, the caps removed, and the heads chopped off. Directly Brandreth's head fell in the basket, the hangman seized it by the red dripping hair, and held it up to the left, the right, and front of the scaffold, exclaiming—

"Behold the head of the traitor Jeremiah Brandreth !"

It was the same with the rest. On the prison caravan arriving, the coffins, on the lids of which the three men's names were written in chalk, were slid in and driven to St. Weyburgh's church. There, without being stripped, the three bodies were at once thrown into a deep grave; Brandreth at the bottom.

Thirty-one other prisoners were acquitted by the wish of the Government. With better opportunities and a nobler purpose, Brandreth, the Nottingham Captain, might have developed into a hero.


---


Peel - Risings of the Luddites, Chartists and Plugdrawers serialised in Huddersfield Daily Examiner eg https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000901/18950413/205/0009



---

http://census1891.com/occupations-all.php
http://rmhh.co.uk/occup/c.html

https://locusmag.com/2022/01/cory-doctorow-science-fiction-is-a-luddite-literature/
Cory Doctorow: Science Fiction is a Luddite Literature