# Luddites Retold. West Riding

See also:

- Thornbury
- Hanson / Huddersfield ago

---
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001638/18730517/073/0006
Barnsley Chronicle - Saturday 17 May 1873

THE LUDDITES IN THE WEST RIDING.

*By A. A. Watson, in "Country Words"*

Two generations have passed away from the face of the world since the attack was made upon Cartwright's Mill, Rawfolds, by the Luddites in 1812. Few men can remember with any degree accuracy the stirring times that were then made by discontented labouring men—goaded till poverty stared them hard in the face with its unwelcome visage. Commercial affairs were at nearly a dead lock, the price of provisions and clothing high, and the Peninsular war occupying care and attention—and perhaps demanding money that would have been better appropriated if spent In allaying the germs of discontent and the pangs of hunger at home, and, "Oh, were I King of France," would no doubt be a line suggestive to working, men of suitable words to meet their ideas at that time. Of course we cannot at the present day imagine such a state of commotion as then existed; great advances have been made since that time in the condition of the man who earns his bread by the sweat of his brow, and to us the followers of the imaginary Ned Lud command not much more sympathy than the Fenian of to-day. Grievances must not now be settled in such a Christian country as ours by recourse to the strength of arm. Duels have given place to actions at law; and if there are any sore spots in the condition of any class of men, they are all best remedied by an appeal to laws that grow less one-sided at every Parliamentary session. The Luddite riots were commenced at the latter end of the year 1811, at Nottingham, at the instigation (no doubt) of agitators, typified present by our Odgers and Bradlaughs, and made successful from the combined influences to which we have before referred; and the one event that lingers prominent in the popular memory is the attack made in April, 1812, on the premises of Mr. William Cartwright, at the little factory still standing on the road side at Rawfolds, between Cleckheaton and Heckmondwike. Yet, though so well known by tradition (if a story but sixty yearn old may be deemed traditionary) few who pass the adjoining turnpike will notice its insignificant form and shape, lost as it is in the forgetfulness occasioned by the nearness of massive new stone factories that overshadow it in bulk. The Luddites seem to have had a strong series of committees under the control of general committees, and a strong and detestable oath, added to a silent yet stern discipline [that] seems to have kept the men who were members in clutches from which, if they possessed the wish, they lacked the courage break. We give copy of the oath for the perusal of our readers:— "I, ————— of my voluntary will, do declare and solemnly swear that I never will reveal to any person or persons who compose the secret committees, their proceedings, meetings, places of abode, dress, features, connections, or anything else that might lead to a discovery of the same, either by word or deed, or sign, under the penalty of being sent out of the world by the first brother who shall meet me, and my name and character blotted out of existence, and never be remembered but with contempt and abhorrence; and I farther now do swear that I will use my best endeavour to punish by death any traitor or traitors, should any rise up amongst us, wherever I can find him or them; and though they should fly to the verge of nature, I will pursue them with unerasing vengeance. So help me God, to bless and help me to keep my oath inviolate." By midnight attacks in bodies, with disguised faces, and armed with every conceivable weapon, did these fanatics pursue their calling. The destruction of obnoxious machinery seemed to be their original intent; but not content with this programme, they destroyed goods that had either been made or finished with the aid of machinery. To these aims they added the stealing of arms and money. Burglaries were committed by wholesale in the villages throughout the West Riding that were near to the great towns, and anything portable in the shape of gold and silver went to increase their spoils. The members were armed with the knives, pistols, or muskets stolen in these midnight rambles, and drilled in companies on the outskirts of their villages at the dead of night. In these depredations they were classed into sections, distinguished by the arm they bore; and it seems that in some of their attacks that even sections of unarmed men were amongst some of the bodies. In March, 1812, at Rawden, parties attacked factories and destroyed the machinery and goods. On the 8th April following, a body of three hundred did similar mischief at Wakefield, as before described, with the addition of front and rear guards of mounted men carrying drawn sabres. Soon after, the Sheffield Militia Armoury was broken into and gutted, and factories at last were demolished and set on fire in all the great centres of the woollen trade. Intimidation was prevalent; the military had to keep constantly ready for calls to arms, and the crowds of rioters had to be dispersed by them daily. Not content with all this commotion, the leaders then impressed upon their dupes that nothing would be decisive till the masters were shot. A Mr Horsfall, of Marsden, was the first they attempted to shoot, and the only person who met his death at their hands. A young woman at Leeds was nearly beaten to death because she had accidentally become acquainted with information that might be used against them. A constable and a magistrate's lives were attempted, as well as the life of General Campbell. All these things happened in the month of April, 1812; and, perhaps, were it not for the prompt measures taken by a Mr Joseph Radcliffe, of Milnsbridge (afterwards for his bravery made a baronet), who formed bodies of special constables, and in other ways gave auxiliary and valuable help to the authorities—as well as the determined resistance made by Mr Cartwright,—things would not have then been so readily settled. On the 11th of April, at one o'clock, one hundred men from the Huddersfield district marched over to Rawfolds at dead of night, armed with various weapons and firearms, and for nearly half an hour endeavoured to break in the doors of Mr Cartwright's factory, demolishing the windows, but at last foiled in their attempts, leaving two wounded men, a quantity of weapons, and other things about the place. The facts of the case seem to have been as follows:—Mr Cartwright had several machines used in the finishing processes of the woollen trade that were obnoxious to the Luddites, and he had for some time expected a nocturnal visit from the secret society. He therefore prepared himself for protecting his property by taking beds into his mill and offices, and accommodating his men there at nights. All were possessed of arms. On the night of the attack ten men were in the mill, half of them soldiers. The howl of the dog was their first alarm; and so well did they protect themselves and their property that they drove away the band of men ten times their number in the time above stated. For this bravery, Mr Cartwright received a gift of £3,000 from the neighbouring gentry. A week after the attack on the mill he was shot at on the road by an unseen man. It was only ten days after this that Mr Horsfall was killed, and then justice, with its slow yet certain claws, seized on their gang, broke up their secret tribunals; and in the January of the following year (1813), sixty-six of the leaders were convicted at a special commission held at York, presided over by Baron Thompson and Sir Simon le Blanc. Seventeen of them were capitally convicted, and paid the penalty with their lives; of the remained, some were sentenced to penal servitude, and the rest were discharged upon their own recognisance to appear for judgment when called upon.

---
https://archive.org/details/celebratedtrials06borr/page/118/mode/2up?q=trial+%22george+mellor%22
Celebrated trials : and Remarkable cases of criminal jurisprudence, from the earliest records to the year 1825
by Borrow, George; Borrow, George

Publication date 1825

pp118-

THE LUDDITES

OF THE MIDLAND COUNTIES.

A special commission was issued for the trial of some gangs of these men in Yorkshire, and opened by Baron Thompson, at York, on the 4th of January, 1813.

On the 5th the court proceeded upon the trial of John Swallow, John Batley, Joseph Fletcher, and John Lamb, for a burglary and felony in the house of Mr. Samuel Moxton, at Whitley Upper: when the jury pronounced them all Guilty.

For many years the workmen of the manufacturing counties have supported their demands for increased payment by associations, and whenever they deemed it necessary to support their pretensions by acts of violence, they called themselves subjects of General Ludd, or Luddites. The chief locality of these depredations has been the vicinity of Nottingham, and thence the spirit has spread in Derbyshire, Leicestershire, and Yorkshire. The evidence produced against them, which, throughout the whole of the judicial trials, is nearly to the same effect — administering false oaths, — riotously assembling — destroying the frames and looms of manufacturers of hosiery, lace, and cloth, breaking into houses, robbery, and murder.

On the 6th George Mellor, of Longroyd Bridge, William Thorp, and Thomas Smith, of Huddersfield, were indicted for the wilful murder of William Horsfall, of Marsden, merchant and manufacturer, at Lock wood, in the West Riding of the county of York.

John Armitage being sworn, deposed,

He keeps a public house at Crossland Moor, called the Warren House; that Mr. Horsfall had, on the 28th of April, been at Huddersfield market, and on his return called at witness's house about a quarter past six in the evening- ; and had a glass of rum and water, treated two persons who were there, paid his reckoning1, and rode away — did not stop twenty minutes at witness'; nor did he get off his horse. Between witness' house and Marsden there is a plantation belonging to Mr. Ratcliffe, and about a quarter of a mite from Warren House. About seven o'clock witness heard that Mr. Horsfall had been shot. Witness and the two persons whom the deceased had been treating went out together and found Mr. Horsfall about twenty or thirty yards below the plantation, sitting on the road side, bleeding very much. They got him down to Warren House as soon as they could, and Mr. Horsfall died there.

Henry Parr was at Huddersfield on the 28th of April last; was upon the road between Huddersfield and Marsden; and, after he had passed the Warren House, heard the report of fire-arms; saw a person riding before him; report seemed to come from Mr. Radcliffe's plantation; saw smoke arising at the same time, and four persons were in the plantation in dark coloured clothes; the person who was before witness on horseback, after the report, fell down on the horse's chine, and the horse turned round as quick as possible; Mr. Horsfall raised himself by the horse's mane, and Called out murder. As soon as he called out murder one of the four men got on the wall with one hand and two feet, and Parr set off to Mr. Horsfall at full gallop. Mr. Horsfall said, good man, you are a stranger to me; I'm shot. Mr. Horsfall grew sick ; and blood began to flow from his side. Mr. Horsfall desired witness to go to Mrs. Horsfall's.

Benjamin Walker an accomplice, stated that the prisoners, George Mellor and Thomas Smith, worked with him at Wood's ; and, in conversation about the attack on Mr. Cartwright's mill, Mellor said there was no way to break the shears — but to shoot the master. Mellor had a loaded pistol, and said he must go with him to shoot Mr. Horsfall. The pistol was loaded. Witness and the three prisoners went to the plantation. Smith had a pistol, which he shewed to the witness. Smith and Walker went together, and got to the plantation first — Thorp and Mellor came afterwards. George Mellor ordered witness and Smith to fire, if they missed Mr. Horsfall ; witness did not lire, but heard Mellor say Mr. Horsfall was coming, and soon after heard the report of a pistol ; they waited at a sort distance till the job was done.

The jury returned a verdict of guilty against all the prisoners.

On the 8th they were executed behind the Castle at York.

On the same day John Baines the elder, John Baines the younger, Zechary Baines, of the same family, the elder nearly seventy years of age, and the latter scarcely sixteen, John Eadon, Charles Milnes, William Blakeborough, and George Duckworth, all of Halifax, were tried for administering an unlawful oath to John Maddonald: and all, except the boy, were found guilty.

On the 9th James Haigh, of Dalton, Jonathan Dearie, of Huddersfield,' John Ogden, James Brook, Thomas Brook, John Walker, of Longroyd Bridge, and John Hirst, of Liversedge, were tried for attacking the mill of Mr. William Cartwright, at Rawfolds. Mr. Cartwright being apprehensive of an attack being made upon his mill, procured the assistance of five soldiers ; and retired to rest about twelve o'clock, bu4 soon afterwards heard the barking of a dog. Mr. Cartwright arose ; and, while opening the door, heard a breaking of windows, and also a firing in the upper and lower windows, and a violent hammering at the door. Mr. Cartwright and his men flew to their arms ; a bell, placed at the lop of the mill, for the purpose of alarming the neighbours, being rung by one of his men, the persons inside the mill discharged their pieces from loop-holes. The fire was regularly returned on both sides. The mob called out, bang up, lads, in with you, keep close ; d———n that bell, get to it, d——n 'em all. The numbers assembled were considerable. The attack continued about twenty minutes. The fire slackened from without ; and they heard the cries of the wounded. The men that were wounded were taken care of. They afterwards died. An accomplice named W. Hall, was one of those connected with Mellor and Thorp, and assembled with many other persons, by desire of Mellor, in a field belonging to Sir George Armitage, bart. on the night of the 11th of April. They called their numbers, remained there some time, and then marched off: Hall's number was seven. Mellor commanded the musket company, another the pistol company, and another the hatchet company : they were formed in lines of ten each. Two of the men were to go last, and drive up the rear. — Some had hatchets, some hammers, some sticks, and others were unarmed.

Another accomplice gave a similar testimony.

The jury found James Haigh, J. Dean, John Ogden, Thomas Brook, and John Walker, Guilty.

On the 11th J. Hay, John Hill, and William Hartley, were next tried for a burglary in the house of Mr. George Haigh, of Sculcoates; and found Guilty.

On the 12th James Hay, Joseph Crowther, and N. Hayle, were found guilty of taking from James Brook a promissory note of one pound, and some silver and copper coin.

On the 14th the grand jury inquired if any other bills were prepared. — Mr. Parke replied, that his learned friends and himself had examined the different cases which had been presented; and, considering that many of these people had acted under the influence of other persons, they had, in the exercise of that discretion confided to them by the crown, declined, at present, to present any other bills. Several prisoners were, in consequence, admitted to bail, on entering into recognizances, the prisoners in 200*l.* each, and their bail in 100*l.* each.

*Mr. Baron Thompson* then passed judgment on the prisoners. — Fifteen to suffer death; six to be transported for seven years; sixteen were discharged on bail ; and sixteen were discharged without bail.

On the 16th the fifteen were brought to the place of execution, and suffered the unsparing severity of the law, in terrorem to others.
