# Yorkshire Stories Retold
 
James Burnley's [*Yorkshire Stories Re-told*](https://play.google.com/books/reader?id=jboHAAAAQAAJ&pg=GBS.PA54&hl=en_GB), 1885, is TO DO


THE STORY OF THE LUDDITE RIOTS

TIMES were bad — even desperate. Trade was paralysed by the long and costly war which we had waged, and were still waging, with Napoleon. Ground down by taxation, reduced to the verge of starvation by the dearness of provisions and the scarcity of employment, the poorer classes of the community were discontented and unhappy, and complained bitterly of their lot. News came now and then of a fresh victory gained by Wellington in the Peninsula, and inspired a temporary hope that the war would be brought to a close and commerce would once more resume its sway, but the weary days went by and the working-men of England were still compelled to suffer from want and privation. Wheat was sold at £9 a quarter about this time in Leeds market, and the populace, headed by a woman whom they styled Lady Lud, assailed the dealers in the market, seized the corn and threw it about the streets. At Sheffield the mob broke into the local Militia store-room and destroyed 800 guns and bayonets. Riots, indeed, were of constant occurrence, and the country was in a highly agitated and troubled condition.

During all this time the work of mechanical invention was in full progress. Inventors were busily employed in bringing out improvement upon improvement, and spinners and manufacturers in all parts of the country were adopting labour-saving machinery in their factories. It was not surprising, perhaps, in this state of things, that the unreasoning multitude should conceive the idea that the introduction of machinery was detrimental to their interests —that it was in a great measure answerable for their being thrown out of employment. A movement was therefore started, the object of which was to put a stop by forcible means to the further use of machinery, and also to destroy such machinery as already existed.

Nottingham was the place where this unhappy feeling was first strongly manifested. The introduction of the then newly-invented stocking-loom was the means of exciting the determined opposition of the Nottingham stocking weavers, and ungovernable mobs assembled and made ferocious attacks upon the places where the stocking-frames were in use. A thousand frames were destroyed in Nottingham alone, and the rioters, who were headed by a mysterious personage, whom they denominated General Ned Lud—hence the name Luddites, —spread themselves over the whole country between Nottingham and Mansfield, and carried destruction with them wherever they went. It was not long before the Luddite agitation reached the West Riding, which was now more largely engaged in the textile manufactures probably than any other part of the country. One of their first attempts at destruction in this district was made on the 24th of March, 1812, when they attacked the mill of Messrs. J. J. & R. Thompson, at Rawdon. The mob were armed with guns, bludgeons, and primitive weapons of various descriptions, and in the early morning they proceeded stealthily towards the mill in question. They first seized the watchman and made him prisoner; then they placed guards in possession of the cottages near the mill, and the main body of rioters entered the factory and completely wrecked the whole of the machinery that they found there. Other places in the neighbourhood suffered in the same way, and not only was the machinery destroyed but the insatiate mob cut to pieces all the manufactured goods that they could lay their hands upon.

On the 9th of April following, about 300 Luddites made their appearance near Wakefield. They marched along the highway in regular sections, preceded by a mounted party with drawn swords and followed by a similar body acting as rear guard. The peaceful inhabitants were greatly dismayed at the sight of the rioters, and were too much alarmed to make any effort to thwart them in their work of destruction. The mob attacked mills and destroyed much valuable property in the neighbourhood of Wakefield, and many other parts of the West Riding were put into terror by the visitations of these lawless people. The burning of the "gig-mill" at Oaklands, near Leeds, and of the Hawksworth corn mills, was attributed to the Luddites; and in and around Huddersfield, Holmfirth, Dewsbury, Cleckheaton, and Liversedge much damage was done by the rioters. About £500 worth of cloth was torn and cut into shreds by them in the finishing shops of Messrs. Dickenson, Carr & Shann, in Water Lane, Leeds, whose machinery they destroyed also. In addition to this, the Luddites frequently attacked the houses of the manufacturers and broke the windows, plundered the rooms, and smashed their furniture.

The movement soon began to assume alarming proportions. At first the Luddites had been content to destroy the machinery only, but as time wore on they grew more bold and more desperate in their dread work, and gradually arrived at the determination to take the lives of the obnoxious masters. The rioters used to hold their meetings in the dead of the night on the moors and commons in the district, and then and there decide what mills or masters were to be the next objects of attack. The Luddites acted with great caution. A general secret committee had the control of all the societies, each of which had its own secret committee for conducting the correspondence and organising measures in concert with societies in other districts. They were bound to each other by a fearful oath, which was administered to each new member with awful solemnity at their midnight meetings. The oath was in the following terms:-

"I, ————— ——————, of my own voluntary free will, do declare and solemnly swear that I never will reveal to any person or persons under the canopy of heaven the names of the persons who compose this secret committee, their proceedings, meetings, places of abode, dress, features, connections, or anything else that might lead to a discovery of the same, either by word or deed or sign, under the penalty of being sent out of the world by the first brother who shall meet me, and my name and character blotted out of existence, and never to be remembered but with contempt and abhorrence; and I further now do swear that I will use my best endeavours to punish by death any traitor or traitors, should any rise up amongst us, wherever I can find him or them; and, though he should fly to the verge of nature, I will pursue him with unceasing vengeance. So help me God, and bless me to keep this my oath inviolable."

Funds were subscribed in all parts of the country in support of the Luddite agitation, and the movement assumed a most threatening aspect—almost swelling to the proportions of a rebellion. Vigorous measures were adopted by the local magistracy for opposing the malcontents, but so secret and determined were the Luddites in their movements that it was found exceedingly difficult to arrest their progress. Mr. Joseph Radcliffe, of Milns Bridge, employed himself with great activity in bringing the offenders to justice, and many of the clergymen in the district, notably the Rev. Hammond Robertson, of Hartshead (the Mr. Helstone of Charlotte Brontë's "Shirley"), rendered valuable assistance. For the part he took in organising a police system for the surprise and detection of the ring-leaders, Mr. Radcliffe was honoured with a baronetcy. Meanwhile, in Lancashire, Cheshire, and Nottingham the police authorities, aided by the military, had been successful in apprehending a number of rioters in their own districts, and although the judges were inclined to deal leniently with them at first, they afterwards found it necessary to adopt more severe measures, and the offenders were sternly punished.

In the month of April, 1812, the Luddites, rendered desperate by the resistance which was now offered to them by the authorities, pushed matters forward to a crisis, and crime after crime followed in quick succession during this and the few following months.

On the night of Saturday, the 11th April, the Luddites, acting on a preconcerted plan, proceeded to make their well-organised attack on the mill of Mr. William Cartwright, at Rawfolds, near Liversedge. Mr. Cartwright was held in great hatred by the Luddites in consequence of his having, despite their threats, persisted in working his new machinery. Mr. Cartwright was a courageous man, and not to be deterred from carrying out his purpose. He had heard that the Luddites had denounced him, and were bent upon destroying his machinery, but feeling that he had right on his side, he was firmly resolved to stand out against the rioters to the last. For upwards of six weeks before the night of the attack, he had slept in his mill, and four of his own workmen and five soldiers were also lodged in the place. On the night referred to, this party of defenders retired to rest shortly after twelve o'clock, Mr. Cartwright having previously ascertained that his watchmen were at their posts outside. About twenty-five minutes before one, a large dog, which was kept on chain on the ground-floor, was heard to bark furiously. Mr. Cartwright immediately jumped out of bed, and on opening the door of the room where he slept he heard the violent breaking of the windows on the ground-floor, followed by a discharge of fire-arms. He also heard a furious hammering at the doors of the mill, and the sound of many voices. Mr. Cartwright and his men had piled their arms the night before, and on rushing towards them Mr. Cartwright met his four workmen and the soldiers, like himself, with nothing on but their shirts. They all seized their guns, and at once set about defending themselves in the best way they could. Mr. Cartwright had placed an alarm bell in readiness on the top of the building, and this was rung with great vigour by two men who were told off for that purpose, and who occupied themselves by turns in firing upon the mob and ringing. "Damn it, silence that bell!" cried the crowd, but the ringing was kept up until the bell-rope broke. In the meantime Mr. Cartwright and his little band maintained a continuous fire through the loop-holes of the mill, and the people without redoubled their efforts, discharging their guns and pistols with great rapidity, and uttering the most dreadful imprecations. "Bang away, my lads!" "In with you!" "Keep close!" "Damn them, kill every one!" were the cries that were heard from the outside. It is calculated that there were from 130 to 150 persons engaged in this attack, but so brave and active were Mr. Cartwright and his gallant little force that the rioters were unable to effect an entrance into the mill, and after a conflict of about twenty minutes, the Luddites slackened fire, their ammunition being probably spent, and with many curses upon the occupants of the mill, they dispersed in the direction of Huddersfield. Shortly afterwards Mr. Cartwright and his men opened the doors and went out, and found two men lying there who had been wounded.. They took the men to the nearest public -house to be attended to, and then returned to the mill, and when daylight came they proceeded to examine the condition of the building. Its appearance was very different from that which it had presented on the previous night; all the frames and glass of the windows on the ground-floor, except about nine panes of glass out of three hundred, were broken to pieces, and the door of the mill was chopped and hacked to a great extent. The two wounded men who had been left behind subsequently died, and a coroner's jury returned a verdict of justifiable homicide. The rioters had met about eleven o'clock on the night of the 11th of April in a field belonging to Sir George Armytage, near what was called the dumb steeple, an obelisk in Sir George's grounds. George Mellor, the General Ludd of the district, who was subsequently executed for the murder of Mr. Horsfall, appears to have acted as commander-in-chief, and the attacking party before proceeding to Rawfolds Mill had been formed into companies and marched off in due military form. The men with muskets went first, then the pistol-men, then the hatchet-men, then the club-men and staff-men, and lastly those who were without weapons of any kind. Mellor commanded the musket- company, and a man named Thorpe had the control of the pistol-men. In this way they marched to Mr. Cartwright's mill and made the attack in which they were so bravely repulsed.

Charlotte Brontë has used up these materials with great power in "Shirley," only, for the sake of more picturesque effect, she described the little mill in the hollow at Haworth and not the mill at Rawfolds as the scene of the midnight attack. Mrs. Gaskell, in her "Life of Charlotte Brontë," says that Mr. Cartwright's dwelling was near the factory, and some of the rioters vowed that if he did not give in they would go to his house and murder his wife and children. "This was a terrible threat," she says, "for he had been obliged to leave his family with only one or two soldiers to defend them. Mrs. Cartwright knew what he had threatened; and on that dreadful night, hearing, as she thought, steps approaching, she snatched up her two infants children and put them in a basket, up the great chimney common in old-fashioned Yorkshire houses."

Mr. Cartwright was twice shot at on the high-road within a week of the attack on his mill, but nothing could make him swerve from what he considered to be his duty. On the trial of the ringleaders in this affair at the York Assizes the following January, Mr. Justice Le Blanc, in summing up, paid a high compliment to Mr. Cartwright for his courageous conduct; and Mr. Cartwright received an additional tribute of admiration from the neighbouring millowners, who subscribed upwards of £3,000 for the benefit of himself and family.

Shortly after the attack on Rawfolds Mill, the Luddites resolved upon the assassination of Mr. William Horsfall, a manufacturer in a considerable way of business at Marsden, near Huddersfield. Mr. Horsfall not only employed a large quantity of the hated machinery, but had been heard to express himself with much warmth against the delusions under which the misguided workmen laboured. He was in the habit of attending the Huddersfield market, and on Tuesday, the 28th of April, 1812, had gone there as usual, and between five and six in the afternoon of that day he started out on horseback from Huddersfield on his return to Marsden, a distance of seven miles. Mr. Horsfall proceeded as far as a public-house called the Warrener House, kept by Joseph Armitage, and stopped there for refreshment, but without alighting from his horse. He had a glass of rum and water, and ordered some gin and water for two of his workmen, who were at that time in the public- house. After this, he bade the landlord "good night," and urged his horse forward towards home. He had not got any further than the corner of a plantation belonging to Mr. Radcliffe, about 300 yards away from the Warrener House, when a shot was fired at him from behind the wall and he fell forward on the neck of his horse. Another horseman, a gentleman named Parr, was riding only a short distance behind, and heard the report of a gun or pistol and saw Mr. Horsfall fall. Mr. Horsfall raised himself up by the horse's mane and called out "Murder!" Mr. Parr saw the smoke from the gun or pistol, and observed four men in the plantation, one of whom got upon the wall as if to close with Mr. Horsfall, but Mr. Parr shouted "What, art thou not content yet?" and the men then ran off at the back of the plantation. "Good God, I am shot!" said Mr. Horsfall, as Mr. Parr seized hold of him and kept him from falling. "Good man," gasped the wounded man, from whose side the blood was gushing fast, "you are a stranger to me, and I to you; but go to Mr. Horsfall, my brother." He then fell from his horse, with his feet fast in the stirrups. Mr. Parr loosed Mr. Horsfall's feet from the stirrups, called two boys who were in the road to come and give assistance, and galloped off to Mr. Horsfall's brother's. A clothier named Bannister came up at this time, and by his aid Mr. Horsfall was conveyed to the Warrener House, where after lingering thirty-eight hours, he died.

Numerous other deeds of murder, atrocity, and outrage were committed about the same time; and the Government were at last compelled to pass a special enactment with a view to checking these crimes. The efforts of the magistracy and the police authorities were redoubled, and during the latter part of the year 1812 the arrests that were made were so numerous that special commissions for the trial of the prisoners were opened at Lancaster, Chester, and York. Rewards were offered and king's pardons to accomplices, and one way and another, a very large number of the leading Luddites were brought to justice.

The Special Commission was opened at York on the 2nd of January, 1813, and continued until the 12th of the same month. Mr. Baron Thomson and Mr. Justice Le Blanc were the judges, and sixty-four prisoners were put upon their trial for offences connected with Luddism.

On the 4th of January Mr. Baron Thomson delivered his charge to the Grand Jury, and on the following day the trials were proceeded with.

The first case was one in which four prisoners, named John Swallow, John Batley, Joseph Fisher, and John Lumb, were charged with burglariously breaking into the dwellinghouse of Mr. William Moxon, at Kirkheaton, where they passed as Luddites, threatened to shoot the inmates, forced them to give them money, and then plundered the house of many things of value. A coal miner named Earl Parkin, an accomplice, turned king's evidence. According to his testimony, he and the four prisoners had met at a place called Bedford's Cabin at midnight, and after blackening their faces and putting their shirts over their clothes, had proceeded to Moxon's house, witness carrying a gun, another a pistol, and a third a sword, and by threats and otherwise had effected the robbery. Some corroborative evidence was given, and all the prisoners were found guilty, and sentenced to death. Lumb, however, was recommended to mercy, it having been stated by Parkin, the accomplice, that he and Lumb had remained about the door, and had not actually entered the house.

On the 6th of January George Mellor, William Thorpe, and Thomas Smith were indicted for the murder of Mr. Horsfall. In this case, as in the last, it was the evidence of an accomplice that procured the conviction of the prisoners. Benjamin Walker was the name of the accomplice in question, and he confessed himself one of the four men who had laid in wait behind the plantation wall for Mr. Horsfall. According to him, Mellor and Thorpe both fired at Mr. Horsfall, but the witness and Smith did not discharge their pistols. Alluding to the evidence of this wretch, Mr. Justice Le Blanc said, "That is the account given by this witness, who certainly by that account makes himself out to be one of the persons, who (if his account is true, and he had been standing at the bar) must have shared the fate which the others will, accordingly as your verdict is for or against them." All the three prisoners were sentenced to death. In the interval between the trial and the execution they refused to make any confession. Thorpe, on being asked if he did not acknowledge the justice of his sentence, said, "Do not ask me any questions." Mellor declared he would rather be in the situation in which he was then placed, dreadful as it was, than have to answer for the crime of their accuser, and that he would not exchange situations with him even for his liberty and two thousand pounds, the amount of the reward. They were executed on Friday morning, the 8th January, before a vast assembly. Every precaution had been taken to render any idea of a rescue impracticable, two troops of cavalry being drawn up in front of the drop, and the avenues to the castle being guarded by bodies of infantry. All the three prisoners had been deeply implicated also in the attack on Cartwright's mill; Mellor, indeed, was the leader of the Luddites in his district. The eldest of the three was not more than three and twenty years of age. Numerous other capital felonies besides that for which they suffered the extreme penalty, were charged against them.

On the 7th of January John Schofield was tried for "maliciously shooting at John Hinchliffe." Hinchliffe lived at Holmfirth; besides being the parish clerk, he was a professional singer, teaching that art to the country people, and among the rest, having the prisoner for his scholar. On the night of the 22nd of July the prosecutor, being in bed, was called to by a voice without his house, and desired to come out. Mr. Hinchliffe then recognised the voice as that of Schofield, and he got up and came to the door. As soon as he opened the door, he was seized by two men armed with pistols, and dragged some considerable distance from his house. At this juncture a horse without any rider trotted up and alarmed the two men. They presumed that some one was riding up to them, and they let the prosecutor go, who escaped towards the house of a neighbour. When the men saw that the horse was riderless, however, they pursued Hinchliffe, and one of them (not the prisoner) presented his piece and fired it. The prosecutor was shot in the eye, which he entirely lost. He screamed out for help, and a neighbour coming to his aid, his two assailants fled. The following day it was discovered that Schofield had absconded, and he was subsequently arrested in London on board a ship bound for America. He did not deny his name, but denied knowing John Hinchliffe. On being brought to Yorkshire, however, he acknowledged that he was well acquainted with the prosecutor, and furthermore stated that it was because it had been hinted to him that he would be charged with shooting Hinchliffe that he absconded, though he protested he was not guilty of the crime imputed to him. At the trial at York he relied on an alibi, and after a long and careful investigation the jury returned a verdict of Not Guilty," and he was released. Lord Brougham (then Mr. Brougham) was one of the counsel engaged for the prisoner.

On the 8th of January the time of the Court was occupied in trying a number of cases in which prisoners were charged with having administered the Luddite oath. Those who were found guilty of the offence were sentenced to be transported for seven years.

On Saturday, the 9th January, eight prisoners were charged with having (along with George Mellor, William Thorpe, and Thomas Smith, who had been executed on the previous day for the murder of Mr. Horsfall) been concerned in the attack on Mr. Cartwright's mill at Rawfolds. The names of the prisoners were James Haigh, Jonathan Dean, John Ogden, James Brook, John Brook, Thomas Brook, John Walker, and John Hirst. The counsel for the Crown were Mr. Park, Mr. Topping, Mr. Holroyd, and Mr. Richardson; and Mr. Brougham, Mr. Hullock, and Mr. Williams were engaged for the prisoners. Two of the chief witnesses for the prosecution were Benjamin Walker, the accomplice and informer in the murder of Mr. Horsfall, and Joseph Sowden. The latter gave evidence strongly implicating the three Brooks, Dean, and Walker, whom he said he had often heard talk of their frame-breaking exploits. Witness said he always detested the proceedings of the Luddites. "Detesting, as you did, these proceedings," said Mr. Hullock, "why did you not instantly give information of them?" "Because I did not conceive they would ever come to the pass they did," was the answer.

"But when you found they had come to that pass, why did you not then inform? Why should you conceal these enormities so long in your own breast?"

"I acted as every other person in the same circumstances, and with my spirit, would have acted."

"Pray, sir, what kind of a spirit have you?"

"A timid spirit."

"But it seems your timidity at last gave way. How was it that at length you summoned up courage to make a disclosure?"

"When I was questioned upon oath I was then obliged to speak the truth, and leave the consequences."

Mr. Cartwright in his evidence related the details of the attack and the defence, so far as his own observation and action went, but he was not able to speak to the person of any individual concerned in the attack.

Five of the prisoners—James Haigh, Jonathan Dean, John Ogden, Thomas Brook, and John Walker— were found guilty; the other three-James Brook, John Brook, and John Hirst—were acquitted.

On Monday, the 11th January, Joseph Brook was tried for burglary at the house of Benjamin Strickland, at Kirkheaton, but was acquitted. On the same day Job Hey, John Hill, and William Hartley were found guilty of having broken into the house of George Haigh, at Skircoat, and. demanded fire-arms in the name of General Ludd.

On the following day James Hey, Joseph Crowther, and Nathan Hoyle were found guilty of a similar offence on the premises of James Brook, at Huddersfield. Seventeen prisoners were liberated upon entering into the usual recognisances to appear when called upon.

Mr. Baron Thomson then proceeded to pass sentence upon the prisoners convicted, beginning with the minor offences. John Eaden, John Baines the elder, Charles Milner, John Baines the younger, William Blakeborough, and George Duckworth were severally "transported beyond the seas for the term of seven years." The unhappy persons capitally convicted, fifteen in number, were then brought up for judgment. The bar, though a large one, was insufficient to contain them all, and a seat in front was cleared for the prisoners to stand together in view of the judges. They were all comparatively young men, some of them having scarcely attained to the age of manhood. The men were placed in the following order:- John Swallow, John Batley, Joseph Fisher, John Lumb, Job Hey, John Hill, William Hartley, James Hey, Joseph Crowther, Nathan Hoyle, James Haigh, Jonathan Dean, John Ogden, Thomas Brook, and John Walker. The Clerk of the Arraigns inquired of the several prisoners, in the solemn language of the law, why judgment of death should not be awarded against them, and each unhappy man entreated that his life might be spared. The judges then assumed their black caps, and Baron Thomson proceeded to deliver the awful sentence.

One of the prisoners swooned while the judge was addressing them, and groans of anguish burst from several of the men as his Lordship spoke of the certainty and near approach of their execution.

During the short time that intervened between sentence and execution the prisoners conducted themselves in a very penitent manner, but no particular disclosures were made by any of them. Most of the men were married and had families. At eleven o'clock on Saturday morning, the 16th January, the Under-Sheriff went to demand the bodies of John Ogden, Nathan Hoyle, Joseph Crowther, John Hill, John Walker, Jonathan Dean, and Thomas Brook. They were all engaged in singing a hymn, which one of them dictated in a firm voice. Whey they arrived at the scaffold they joined in the prayers with great fervency. Joseph Crowther, addressing himself to the spectators, said, Farewell, lads. "Another said, "I am prepared for the Lord; "and John Hill said, "Friends, all take warning by my fate. For three years I followed the Lord, but about half-a-year since I began to fall away, and fell by little and little, and at last I am come to this; persevere in the ways of godliness, and oh, take warning by my fate." The executioner then proceeded to the discharge of his duty, and as the drop fell an involuntary shriek arose from the vast concourse of spectators.

The remaining seven prisoners were then led to the place of execution, and a similar heartrending scene occurred. All the men prayed earnestly before the fatal noose was adjusted. Large bodies of soldiers, horse and foot, guarded the place, and the spectators were very numerous.

John Lumb was respited, his sentence being commuted to transportation for life.

Thus ended one of the saddest chapters in the criminal history of this country.
