# Annals of Nottinghamshire 

https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=-8c9AAAAcAAJ&source=gbs_navlinks_s 
Annals of Nottinghamshire: History of the County of Nottingham ..., Volume 4
By Thomas Bailey, 1853

pp243-

1811

...

The operation of the decrees of the Emperor of France against British commerce was, at this time, beginning to tell fearfully on the condition of the working classes. An excessive high price of the necessaries of life, joined to scarcity of employment, compelled thousands to have recourse to parochial relief for the support of themselves and families. Not being able to furnish the destitute with better employment, the men were by hundreds employed as scavengers and repairers of the roads adjacent to the town. As might almost be expected, the poor creatures, maddened by suffering, and unable to reach the true authors of their calamities, turned their vengeance against the employers, as the most proximate cause of such afflictions. On the 11th of March, a large body of framework knitters assembled in the Market-place, and after working each other up to a high degree of excitement, by a rehearsal of their sufferings, and the alleged oppression which was committed upon them, by the several abatements which had taken place in the remuneration for labour, expressed their determination of preventing any further reductions, by taking prompt vengeance on those manufacturers who, as they conceived, had been most forward in bringing about abatements.

The appearance of the civil and military authorities, however, in considerable strength, prevented any important disorders from being perpetrated in the town. At night, however, by a pre-concerted arrangement, a body of men assembled at Arnold, and before any information could be conveyed to Nottingham of the affair, broke sixty-three frames, chiefly belonging to a manufacturer named Brocksopp, residing at the Weekday-cross. This exploit immediately became popular among the workmen, who did not stop to consider that, by this absurd means of seeking redress, they were but aggravating the evil under which all, masters and workmen, were alike suffering. So rapidly did the mischievous contagion spread, that in less three weeks, at least two hundred frames were broken to pieces. Several persons were apprehended on suspicion of being concerned in these outrages, but no sufficient evidence could be obtained to warrant their detention: they were, therefore, to the great exultation of their companions, uniformly compelled to be discharged. In addition to the ordinary means of enforcing authority, and detecting offenders, two police officers, of tried ability, from Bow-street, London, were stationed in the neighbourhood, to ensure, if possible, the apprehension of some of these violent marauders, but without success. To further strengthen the existing local civil and military authorities, the Royal Lancashire Militia, en route from Worcester to Hull, was detained in the town for several weeks.

By the census taken on the 27th of May, this year, the population of Nottingham was ascertained to be as follows:

Inhabited houses, 6,538; 
families, 7,245; 
males, 15,534; 
females, 18,824; total, 34,358.

Several nights about Midsummer, this year, were so cold, as that ice of considerable thickness was produced; and what was not a little extraordinary, two large flights of fieldfares, and one of wild-ducks, were seen hovering about the neighbourhood.

...

On the 4th of November, the practice of frame breaking was renewed, with circumstances more alarming even than those by which it had been marked in the spring of the year, and which, from this time, continued in full activity till its close. The desperate measures adopted by the workmen of this neighbourhood had, at that period, an injurious effect upon those of the whole county, as well as upon the men of Derby, Leicester, York, and Lancaster; inasmuch, as the system pursued by the frame-breakers, or, as they termed themselves "Luddites," was adopted by the rioters in those several counties. The practice of these men, by a previously concerted arrangement, was to assemble in parties of from six to sixty, according to circumstances, under an acknowledged leader, styled General Ludd, who had the absolute command over them, and directed all their operations. The place of destination being arrived at, and the object of their vengeance clearly pointed out, the guards, armed with swords, firelocks, and other offensive weapons, were duly stationed in their proper places, with orders, at the peril of their lives, to allow no one to pass, or to stir out of their houses. The pioneers, as they may be termed were then ordered promptly to advance, enter, or break in the door, as the case might be, and proceed to their work of demolition, which generally was only the task of a few minutes. This being completed, and the whole of the party re-assembled, the leader called over the list of his men, who answered to a particular number, when he discharged a pistol, as a signal that all was right, and each one made his way from the scene of action as he best thought proper. To return, however, to the affair of the 4th of November, and which account we will, in this case, copy from one of the local journals of the day:

> On Sunday night last, a party of men assailed the house of a person of the name of Hollingworth, of Bulwell, who had rendered himself obnoxious to the workmen, but who from timely information, had removed apart of his frames to Nottingham, and had provided seven or eight persons, armed with muskets, to protect the seven frames remaining in his house. Notwithstanding the formidable nature of this defence, which was well known to the attacking party, the assailants, after eighteen or twenty shots had been exchanged, forced their way into the house, and when in the act of entering the door of the room in which the frames stood, the first man received a discharge in his abdomen, which in a few minutes deprived him of life; but who had just time to exclaim-" Proceed, my brave fellows, I die with a willing heart!"

His companions conveyed his dead body to the borders of the Forest, near which the house of Hollingworth stood, and then, with a fury irresistible by the force opposed to them, again attacked the house, and in about an hour and a half fully completed the object of their attack; while the guards, or what should have been so, sought safety in flight. The same night ten or twelve frames were destroyed in a house at Kimberley.

Monday passed over with only heavy murmurs and threats of further vengeance; but on Tuesday, as eight or nine frames, belonging to one of the manufacturers, (who were now endeavouring, as fast as possible, to secure their machines in places of safety in the town) were being removed, the driver of the vehicle was stopped in the middle of the street in the populous village of Basford, when a number of men, with their faces blackened, or otherwise disguised, entered the cart, armed with heavy hammers, and broke such parts of the frames as were capable of being, at the time, rendered utterly useless, and then threw the fragments, with the wood-work, on the road, where they were afterwards consumed. On Wednesday evening the rioters, to the number of about one thousand, collected from the adjacent villages, assembled on the Mansfield-road, near to the seventh mile-stone, for the purpose of deliberating on further proceedings. About three hundred of these men were said to be armed with muskets and pistols, and the others with weapons of various kinds. Thence they proceeded to Sutton-in-Ashfield, where they broke from sixty to seventy frames. What few of the Mansfield troop of Volunteers remained attached to that corps, were called out; and being joined by seven dismounted dragoons, (that happened to be at Mansfield, escorting two French prisoners) they proceeded to Sutton, and secured about half-a-score of the depredators, who were a few days afterwards removed to the County Gaol, Nottingham. The body of the unfortunate man shot at Bulwell, (who was a resident of Arnold) was removed to the latter place for interment. The funeral scene was one of a really terrific character. From seven hundred to a thousand of his misguided fellow-workmen were assembled on the occasion, and looks of stern and savage defiance seemed to brood on every countenance. Apprehending that occasion might be taken of the circumstance to inflame the minds of the populace, by extolling the actions of this man, and elevating him into the character of a martyr in the cause of the people, Thomas Wright, Esq. , the high-sheriff, attended by the under-sheriff, half-a-dozen magistrates, a posse of constables, a company of mounted dragoons, and a detachment of infantry, followed the corpse into the church-yard. The excitement was tremendous: yells, threats, denunciations, and cries for vengeance, were heard on every side. The Riot Act was read; and as some of the ringleaders were proceeding to address the multitude, even whilst the funeral service was being read, the regimental drums were beaten, and the spirit of confusion, amounting almost to demoniacal phrenzy, seemed to pervade the whole assembled multitude. Directly the coffin was lowered, the magistrates gave orders for the church-yard to be cleared.

There was at first some difficulty in carrying this order into execution; but as the authorities at length gave orders for taking every one into custody who disobeyed the command, a clearance was at length effected. Several solitary cases of frame breaking occurred during the first fortnight of the month, besides those just particularised. On the 23rd of November, the Luddites, in detached parties, made a simultaneous attack upon various workshops at Basford, and completely destroyed about thirty frames, the ironwork of which they scattered about in all directions. This proceeding was conducted with so much secresy and despatch, that long before any resisting force could be collected, the mischief was fully accomplished, and the perpetrators dispersed. The Earl of Waldegrave, then in command of the troops at the Barracks, immediately, on being informed of the circumstance, scoured the country in all directions, but in vain. In the course of the same week, frames were broken in Trumpet-street and York-street, Nottingham; and at Chilwell, Cossall, Eastwood, Heanor, Arnold, and other places.

The wide frames employed in the making of cut-ups were the most obnoxious to the vengeance of the populace; but in other instances the rioters extended their outrages to all frames worked either at reduced prices, or by hands not regularly brought up to the trade. The consequences of these violences were ruinous to many of the small owners of frames, and others, who, through fear, were compelled to cease working, and have their machinery, under military escort, removed into the town as a place of security. In consequence of a continuance of the riots through the early part of December, the magistrates, both of the town and county, issued a notice, calling upon all publicans to close their houses, nor suffer any company to remain therein, after ten o'clock at night; and directing further, that all householders, their servants, and dependants, should remain within doors after that hour, so long as the disposition to tumult, then prevalent, should continue. They also intimated that to enter a house in the night-time to demolish a frame, was, in the eye of the law, burglary, and punishable with death, and that all offenders would meet with the utmost severity. It was hoped, by the publication of this notice, and the arrival of additional troops, (the Royal Horse Guards Blue and the Berkshire Militia, which had then been ordered to Nottingham) that the outrages would have been materially checked, if not altogether subdued. This expectation, however, proved perfectly illusive; and the practice of frame breaking spread with great rapidity, and increased audacity, throughout the whole length and breadth of the midland hosiery districts. At the latter end of December the government offered a reward of £50 to any party instrumental in the conviction of a frame-breaker, but without effect.

...

1812

...

The year opened on Nottingham with an aspect of present wretchedness, and a prospect of future misery and destitution to one portion of its inhabitants, and embarrassment and ruin to the other. The high remunerating price of agricultural produce, the immense contracts for our own army and navy, and the subsidies we were making in the way of clothing, &c. , to our continental allies, kept up a considerable internal trade, more especially in particular districts; but the fine goods of Nottingham manufacture, in the absence of that foreign trade, which was now almost entirely cut off by the operation of the Berlin and Milan decrees of Napoleon, derived little benefit from these sources. Indeed , universal distrust and gloom pervaded the whole town. Wheat, at this time, was at 108s. per quarter, with every other article of domestic consumption, as tea, sugar, spices, &c., at double, and (in some instances) treble their present prices: in addition to which, it may be added, that the Income Tax, enforced with unsparing severity, was at ten per cent. , and all the assessed taxes on a similar scale of exaction, as compared with present rates. Such was the declension of foreign commerce, that the declared value of the total of British and Irish produce and manufactures exported during the preceding year, amounted to no more than £32,890,712, showing a falling off of about sixteen millions on the average of the two preceding years; while the public expenditure, during the same year, had advanced seven millions, and reached the then unprecedented sum of £82,735,223; though even this large sum fell five millions short of the year upon which we have now entered. Is it then to be wondered at that want and misery prevailed to an appalling degree among the working-classes; or that, in the desperation of their circumstances, they should be led to view almost every man, whose position in society afforded him an opportunity, in any degree, of exercising control over the remuneration for labour, as their enemy ? That such misconduct, to speak of it in the mildest terms, as brought about an almost total suspension of their regular employment, by destroying the machines by which alone it could be furnished, was an act of most wretched folly on the part of the workmen, it may well be believed, as likewise that the workmen themselves have long been convinced of the madness of such proceedings. Still, it is true that "oppression will drive a wise man mad;" and, therefore, it is not much to be wondered at, though at all times to be regretted, that under the pressure of extreme suffering, masses of men should have recourse to insane projects, such as was frame breaking, for the redress of their grievances. The social condition of Nottingham itself-more especially during the early months of the year from the unintermittent apprehension of outrages, of which no sagacity could now predict the extent or degree; the constant presence of numerous bodies of troops, of almost every variety of arms; the garrisoning of houses, and the constant nightly terror of many of its inhabitants, lest they should be aroused from their beds by alarms in the streets, or outrages on their own dwellings, was really that of a town in a condition of siege. The Nottingham Journal, of the 10th of January, says "It is with extreme regret we state that, notwithstanding every measure calculated to put a stop to the felonious system of frame breaking, conciliatory as well as coercive, the practice still continues, and, if possible, under more aggravating circumstances. No less a number than forty-three stocking and lace frames have been broken in the vicinity of the town, and several even in the town itself, since our last publication; and what adds most seriously to this evil, is, that it has opened the door for the commission of every other species of crime, murder only excepted." To enumerate every instance of frame breaking which occurred about this period, and the outrages connected therewith, would no doubt make a volume of considerable size; such instances, therefore, as henceforward will be furnished, are those most calculated to show the system of secrecy, design, and organization, under which these violences on person and property were perpetrated. The editor of the New Annual Register, in the preface to the volume for 1812, says:

> We may safely assert, that the public interest was never excited so anxiously, permanently, or generally, as by the domestic and foreign events and transactions of the year 1812. At home, the disturbances which agitated our manufacturing districts, for some time created great alarm and apprehension. It was not merely the mystery in which they were involved, the extent of country over which they spread, or the length of time during which they continued, that gave rise to this alarm and apprehension, but the peculiar character which they assumed, the system with which they were conducted, and the suspicion that they originated from more serious causes than want of employment, and the pressure of the times, and aimed at objects connected with the stability of government, and the peace of the country.

About seven o'clock on Sunday evening, the 12th of January, a party of men in disguise, armed with pistols, entered the house of Mr. Thomas Benson, in Carter-gate, Nottingham, and after taking measures to prevent any one from giving alarm, by placing sentinels at the doors of all the adjacent houses, and the approaches leading to the premises, they proceeded up stairs, and demolished eight valuable frames, in about as many minutes. During the commission of the offence not the least noise was heard in the street, and the retreat was simultaneous, and in perfect order. On the following morning, about six o'clock, eight men, disguised and armed, entered the house of Mr. Noble, of New Radford, and while one remained on watch below, and another to take care of the mistress of the household, the remainder went up stairs, and destroyed four warplace machines, because, as the perpetrators of the outrage alleged, they were making two-course hole-a cheaper description of article than the workmen were desirous to have tolerated in the trade. Noble, (who was anxious to preserve his property, or that of his employer, from destruction,) was forced out of the frame by the stroke of a sword, which narrowly missed his head, and cut asunder nearly the whole of the threads across the machine. The screams of his wife, which even a severe blow on the head, from the butt-end of a pistol, by the ruffian left in charge of her, could not stop, brought Noble down to her assistance, and also a neighbour, who contrived to enter the house by the back door. They at once seized the fellow, and tried to disarm him; when, perceiving his danger, he shouted out at the top of his voice, "Ned Ludd!" and his associates rushed down stairs to his rescue. In the strife and confusion a pistol was struck by one of the gang, but happily missed fire. Finding the door fastened upon them from the outside, the desperadoes broke out the pannels, and forced their way through a crowd of people, threatening with instant death any one who might attempt to arrest, or follow them; and so escaped. About the same period, twenty frames were broken at Clifton, and fourteen at Ruddington. As soon as the work of destruction was commenced at these places, mounted messengers were despatched to the Barracks, and a troop of Hussars, in conjunction with the Bunny troop of Yeomanry Cavalry, gallopped off, and secured the passes over the Trent, under the full expectation of intercepting the Luddites on their return to the town. The latter, however, seized a small boat above Clifton, and when they arrived on the opposite bank, discharged their firearms, and made good their retreat. The same evening, two soldiers were stationed in the house of a person named Barnes , at Basford, to assist him in the protection of his machinery; but while they were sitting by the fire, with their arms resting near them, seven men rushed in, and seized them. Two of the fellows then impudently stationed themselves as sentries at the door, armed with the soldiers' muskets, while their companions demolished three frames; having accomplished which, they released the soldiers, and decamped, carrying away the muskets in triumph. Nine warp-lace machines on the premises of Mr. Shipley, of Linby, were damaged to the extent of £200. The proprietor had an apprehension of a visit from the Luddites, and had secured the services of a number of neighbours, who, well provided with arms, guarded his house till sometime after midnight, when, indulging in the belief that all danger, for that night, at least, was over, retired to their respective homes. No sooner had they got clear of the premises, than fourteen fellows, who had lain in ambush, and watched their departure, entered the shop, and accomplished in security the demolition of the machinery. The audacity with which these outrages was now perpetrated will be readily inferred, from the following incident: About eleven o'clock in the forenoon, a carrier was bringing a frame from Kimberley, and was walking leisurely beside his cart, near the junction of the four roads, against Aspley-terrace, Radford, when a man with a goat-skin mask, the beard of which reached down to his waist, jumped into the vehicle, and with a smith's large hammer, fell to work furiously, and demolished the frame. The carter made what resistance he could, but the villain threatening to knock his brains out with the hammer if he interrupted him in his work, he was allowed to proceed with the demolition, when he started off at full speed down the road, towards Radford church, and was very soon out of sight. About five o'clock in the morning of the 12th of February, an inhabitant of West-street, Highcross-street, Nottingham, was suddenly aroused from sleep by a tremendous noise, and before he could make use of two loaded pistols, which for better security he placed at his bed's-head, his arms were pinioned by a Luddite, who, with the aid of a ladder, and sledge-hammer, had broken in the window and jumped through the aperture. This man (who was subsequently hung at Leicester) was instantly followed into the room by a number of his companions, and while one of them secured the family, others went to the workshop, and demolished five valuable warp-lace machines. Two, however, were left uninjured, owing, as it was supposed, to the circumstance of a female neighbour vociferating "Murder" at the top of her voice, during the whole period that the outrage was being perpetrated; and that notwithstanding a pistol was discharged at her. As the men were descending the ladder to the street, the assembled spectators, of which there were now several, observing, as they thought, a number of soldiers waiting at the foot, naturally inferred that the military night-picquet was engaged in making a capture. It turned out, however, to be a ruse:
twenty-five associates, armed, and clad in old military greatcoats, had adopted the artifice to ensure a safe retreat. The mayor and corporation of Nottingham appointed a secret committee, invested with a discretionary power to expend any sum not exceeding two thousand pounds , for the purpose of obtaining such information as might be useful in suppressing the disturbances, and bringing the rioters to punishment.

This committee offered large rewards for secret intelligence, and engaged never to divulge the names of informants; and for enabling them to conduct their inquiries and operations with efficiency and secrecy, they were absolved from all liability to render any account of their expenditure. These funds were, no doubt, derived from the national treasury, and constituted part of the secret service money, at that time so liberally voted at the disposal of the minister. But all was unavailing; nothing could penetrate the mystery of "Luddism," nor break the bond of union which bound its deluded and mischievous devotees together. In spite of all their errors, and all their crimes, it is impossible to withhold admiration from the stern integrity of purpose which thus led a number of poor men to withstand the tempting offer of bribes, of from one hundred to three hundred guineas, and, in one instance, to £500, to turn informants against their fellows, and thus betray the cause in which they had engaged, avowedly for the purpose, however mistakenly the design, or mischievous the means by which they sought to accomplish their object, of improving the condition of the order to which they belonged. Up to this period nearly seven hundred frames had been demolished. From the 14th of November to the close of the year, between 800 and 900 cavalry, and 1,000 infantry, in addition to the local civil and military force, had been ordered into Nottingham-a larger force, it was admitted in parliament, than had ever before been found necessary, at any period of our history, to be employed in the quelling of a merely local disturbance-yet all, as we have seen, was hitherto insufficient for the purpose. On the 6th of February, Mr. Whitbread brought the subject of the riots of Nottingham under the consideration of the house, and inquired if ministers were prepared to go into an investigation of the subject. On the 14th of February, Mr. Ryder, the Secretary of State for the Home Department, moved for leave to bring in bills "for more exemplary punishing persons found guilty of destroying stocking and lace frames," &c. To the penal part of this bill, which made the crime of frame breaking, till the 1st of March, 1814, an offence punishable with death, some opposition was made by several members. The first division, on "leave to bring in the bill," the numbers were, ayes 49; noes, 11. It likewise received some opposition in the Lords; but was ultimately carried through both houses, and received the royal assent early in March.

On Sunday, March 1st, the very unusual, and, to sensitive minds, painful spectacle was presented of the infantry force stationed in the town attending divine service, at St. Mary's church, in full accoutrements, and with fixed bayonets. The alleged reason for this was an apprehended attack upon the County Gaol, for the release of prisoners, during the time the soldiers were at church.

At the Lent assizes (March 17) the County Criminal Court was crowded to excess to witness the trials of a number of persons charged with frame breaking. Mr. Justice Bailey presided on the occasion; and displayed a degree of forbearance, calmness, patience, and impartiality, which won the admiration and respect of all present. Two very young men, William Carnel and Joseph Maples, of Basford, were first placed at the bar; and after a very protracted investigation, were found guilty of being concerned in breaking seven frames, on the premises of Mr. John Braithwaite, of Basford: they were each sentenced to fourteen years' transportation. Gervase Marshall, aged 17, George Green and Benjamin Hancock, aged 21, Robert Poley, aged 16, and Joseph Peck, aged 17, were indicted for breaking a number of frames at Sutton-in-Ashfield, on the premises of Mr. F. Betts. Hancock and Peck were sentenced to fourteen years' transportation, and Marshall and Green to seven years each. Two or three others arraigned on similar offences were acquitted. It is remarkable that one of these convicts, George Green, lived to acquire very considerable property in the colony to which he was transported. In the year 1845 , the Rev. G. Atkinson, curate of Arnold parish, received a letter from Hobart Town, New South Wales, respecting the death of a person named George Green, formerly of Arnold parish, who had left considerable property, and requesting to be informed who was his next of kin. The person described appeared to have been the convict of that name above referred to, and the property to which his elder brother succeeded was worth about £300 a-year.

To the other crimes of Luddism was now to be added a deliberate attempt at assassination. At about a quarter to ten o'clock at night, on the 27th of April, Mr. Trentham, sen. , an extensive manufacturer of hosiery in Nottingham, was returning home from a convivial party, periodically held at the Crown and Cushion Tavern, Market-street, when an attempt was made to murder him. Mr. Trentham had reached his home-an antique residence, which stood at the south-west corner of Kaye's-walk, St. Mary's Church-yard-and had knocked at the door for admittance, and whilst waiting inside the porch, with his face towards the entrance, two men stepped up to him from among the tomb-stones, (Mr. Trentham's house facing into the church-yard) one of whom instantly, without speaking a word, discharged at him the contents of a large horse-pistol.

The ball entered his right breast, and passing obliquely, lodged near the shoulder-blade. The assassins, who were described by the sufferer as "very small men," (Mr. Trentham himself being of somewhat diminutive stature) instantly fled in different directions. A surgeon being promptly called in, the ball was extracted; and Mr. Trentham, then far advancing into years, was gradually restored to convalescence, though his life, for several days, was considered to be in most imminent danger. The mayor issued a printed notice the next morning, offering a reward of one hundred guineas to any person giving such information as might lead to the apprehension of either, or both the assassins; and a further reward of five hundred guineas upon conviction: to this was added £75 by Mr. Trentham, making up a gross sum of six hundred pounds! This large reward, however, like all previous ones, remained unpaid; though there was every reason to believe that several persons were privy to the plot, and knew well the persons by whom it was carried into execution. Suspicion almost immediately fell upon two desperate and determined "little men," known to be intimately connected with Luddism-both natives and residents of Basford, and both of whom, as Luddites, came to untimely ends, the one being shot in attempting to commit an outrage, and the other publicly executed for the offence of frame breaking-but not a tittle of evidence, on this occasion, could be obtained against them; though every art which police ingenuity could suggest was, by the magistrates, put in operation to effect the much desired object of bringing them to justice.

The misery of the poor in the town still increasing, a public subscription was entered into, during the month of May, for their relief, irrespective of parochial settlement, when the liberal sum of £3,000 was contributed.


...


After a short pause in their lawless career, the Luddites again commenced operations, which they, in most instances, carried on with their wonted effrontery and success, as the following instance will prove: About seven o'clock on Sunday evening, November 22nd, six armed men, disguised, entered the house of Mr. Glew, in East-street, while he and two friends were sitting by the fireside, smoking their pipes. They immediately put out a light they found burning on the table, and placing a guard over two of the men in the house, compelled, at the threat of violence, the third man to accompany them to the workshop, and point out a lace machine which "Ned Ludd had been informed was at work for half goods and half money." The man having performed this duty, the machine was demolished, and the party retired without any disturbance, beyond what took place in the house.

A renewed and vigorous effort, backed by a public subscription, amounting to more than £600, was again put forth this year by the framework-knitters, to induce the legislature to redress their grievances, by restraining the manufacturers from certain practices, alleged to be injurious to the trade. A petition was presented, and a select committee of the commons appointed, who examined a great number of witnesses, and on the 27th of May, made a report to the house. A bill was afterwards brought in, embodying most of the suggestions of the committee, which were of a very mixed character, some of them not only useful, but necessary, for the fair protection of the workmen; others worse than useless. The bill, however, passed successfully its third reading in the commons; but on being sent up to the lords, where no opposition was anticipated, it was, on the second reading, rejected by a large majority; all parties joining in condemnation of its principle of interference with the freedom of trade, and the separations it attempted to draw between the interests of masters and workmen.

1814

...

The long continuance of severe weather, accompanied by an immense fall of snow, made the commencement of this year memorable in the experience of all those persons whose age or circumstances in life made them sensible of the exceeding inconveniences and privations to which it everywhere gave rise.

The frost set in on the 24th of December, and continued, without any interruption in its severity, till the 26th of January, when a partial thaw took place. The cold, however, as if to regain its lost ground, on the day following set in again with increased intensity; and so continued, with little variation, for eight weeks longer: it is thus generally referred to as "the thirteen weeks' frost." Accumulations of ice and snow rendered the streets for several weeks all but utterly impassable, and raised them, in many places, from one to two feet above their ordinary level. The Trent, for the first time through a great number of years, was frozen over, supporting, in many places, the weight of teams of horses and loaded waggons passing over it, as well as fires being kindled upon the bed of the ice. Of course, as might be expected, thousands of people from Nottingham, and a similar number in proportion to the population at almost all other towns along the course of the river, made it a grand promenade on the afternoons of Sundays. What added much to the inconvenience of the rivers and canals being frozen up for so long a time, was the circumstance, before alluded to , that a great fall of snow accompanied the frost, so that in many instances the highways of the country were completely blocked up, and the transit of goods and passengers by the public vehicles rendered both difficult and dangerous. The following instance may be quoted in confirmation of this statement: On Saturday, the 28th of January, the Leeds mail left Nottingham about seven in the evening, drawn by six good horses, and at half-past nine had reached no further than eight miles on the road to Mansfield; the last mile, owing to the fatigue of the horses, and the accumulation of snow upon the wheels and body of the coach, having taken more than an hour to traverse. The outside passengers, two in number, were then desired by the driver to get inside, and make themselves, with a lady and gentlemen then within the coach, "comfortable for the night," as both himself and the guard found it impossible to take the coach any further; observing at the same time-without, as may well be supposed, adding thereby to the comfort of the company that a man was lying dead on the road, near to where they were stopping. Exertions were immediately made to reach the body, and in about ten minutes the man (for he was still alive, though totally unconscious,) was reached, and brought into the vehicle.

In the course of an hour he became so far recovered as to be able to tell his name, and where he came from. The coachman, with five of the horses, sought refuge at a farm-house in the neighbourhood; the guard, with one horse and the mailbags, returned to Nottingham. On the following morning the lady was fetched home again by her husband in a post-chaise, with four horses attached, and the rest of the company made their way over the frozen snow to Mansfield, as best they could. With the double object of opening the town streets for purposes of traffic, and affording employment to bodies of distressed workmen, cast out of their regular avocations by the long continued frost, the corporation, in conjunction with the overseers of the poor, set a large number of persons, in gangs, to remove the snow into the centre of the Market-place. An oblong stack, about forty yards by twenty, and about fifteen feet in height, was raised. So compact did this ponderous mass become, through the action of the atmosphere, and the treading upon it by boys, who cut out steps to climb to its summit, that a large bulk of it remained till the month of June, and even then had to be carted away. When the thaw at last set regularly in, great apprehensions were entertained for the safety of the Trent-bridge; but prompt and judicious means being employed to break and remove the ponderous masses of ice as they came in contact with the piers, the danger passed away without any serious mischief being occasioned. Among other purposes to which the mass of frozen snow in the Marketplace, during its continuance, was appropriated, was that of hollowing out in one of its sides a room, for the exhibition of two fat hogs, during the March Fair.

...

The following daring act of the Luddites created a great degree of excitement at the time, and cannot be read but with interest even at this period: On the 9th of May, between the hours of nine and ten at night, two men with silk handkerchiefs tied over their faces, entered the house of Mr. William Matthews, Bullock's-yard, Bellar-gate, while a part of the family was at supper. The first, who had a hatchet in his hand, took the candle off the table, and proceeded to the bottom of the stairs, followed by his companion, who exhibited a pistol of considerable calibre; at the same moment a confederate at the door called to the family in a loud and stern voice not to stir, at the peril of their lives; and instantly the muzzles of six or eight guns were pointed at them. The two men, without further hesitation, ran up stairs into the workshop, and began to break four valuable frames, making silk-knotted hose, the property of Mr. Bullock. When their enterprise was fully accomplished, the men made good their retreat; till which time no alarm whatever was created in the neighbourhood.

...

During the months of July and August, the town of Nottingham and its immediate vicinity continued to be disturbed and alarmed by daring acts of Luddism, which involved a considerable destruction of property, and entailed a large amount of expense upon the public; nor had anything yet been brought to light which could unravel the mystery of this illegal association, or bring the members of it to punishment. The same secrecy, the same rapidity of movement and change of the scene of action, the same spirit of daring intrepidity in the carrying out of their operations and inviolable fidelity to each other, which from the first had distinguished them from all other illegal combinations against the authority of the laws and the peace of society, still continued to actuate and animate the confederacy It is now our painful duty to record one of the most violent outrages, ending in the death of two persons, by which the records of Luddism in these parts are distinguished. From the depositions, taken before Mr. Wright, one of the coroners for the county, at the "Plough Inn," New Basford, where the violence was committed, on the evening of the 14th of October, it appeared that, about five or six weeks before, an attack was made upon the house of Mr. Garton, of that hamlet, by a number of Luddites, when several frames were destroyed.

Upon Garton's information a man named James Towle, a native and resident of Basford, and whom common report charged as being a leading man among the Luddites, had been committed to prison, charged with this offence. Towle was a man of small stature, but of great activity; and, for his size, of immense strength. `[He was tried on this charge at the following assize, and acquitted.]` In consequence of this information, threats of further violence had been directed against Garton, which led on his part to serious apprehensions of his personal safety.

The victim of this associated criminality at length received positive assurance from one evidently fully competent to afford correct information, "that, on that very evening, when it was expected that he would be found making up his goods, to take to his employer's warehouse on the following morning, (Saturday) the long meditated attack would certainly be made upon him, with the purpose of depriving him of life." Alarmed at this intelligence, Garton lost no time in escaping from home; and such was the hurry of his departure, that he did not even stop to put on his coat or hat, but reached Nottingham in safety, destitute of both. Having laid his information before the magistrates, several officers, well armed, were despatched by various routes, all of whom, under the shades of evening, arrived at the house of Garton unperceived. The first step taken by the officers was to direct the removal of the family, who accordingly took refuge at the fireside of a neighbour, distant about thirty yards from their own home; and the next was to remove some of the furniture out of the house-place, and so make a clear way for action, should the threatened assault be made. The officers then placed a light or two in the houseplace, and withdrew into a small adjoining parlour. About half-past nine they heard footsteps approaching, and shortly afterwards three men entered the house, quickly followed by several others. Not finding, as they expected, their intended victim in the house, one of them exclaimed in surprise, " D—
him, where is he ?" and were proceeding towards the parlour door, when a stir of the officers first gave them the idea that they were betrayed. On this two or three shots were fired by them in the direction of the parlour, but without injury to any of the occupants, who now rushed forward, and discharging a loaded blunderbuss, shot the foremost dead. The house was now in total darkness; so that it was impossible, under these circumstances, for either party to discover friends from foes.

Two or three other shots, however, were fired; but no further mischief done. The Luddites retired precipitately from the house. Mr. William Kilby, a respectable framework knitter, the person at whose house Mrs. Garton had taken refuge, hearing the firearms discharged, ventured to open the door, to learn what was proceeding, just at the period of the retreat of the Luddites; who, not knowing the extent of the snare prepared for them, and therefore jealous and alarmed at everything which stirred around them, seeing a man coming out of the door, under the apprehension that he might be an enemy on the watch, one of them struck a pistol in his face, and shot him dead. The man shot in Garton's house was left on the floor till the following morning, when it proved to be Samuel Bamford, the pet companion of Towle from his childhood, they having been born and brought up next door to each other. Like Towle, he was a man of small stature, but with courage and energy sufficient to qualify him for enterprises of the most hazardous description. In the former case the jury returned a verdict of "Justifiable Homicide," and in the latter,  Wilful Murder by some person or persons unknown." A royal proclamation was immediately issued, offering a reward of two hundred guineas for discovery of the perpetrators of the outrage, and also a reward of half that amount to any of the men (except the one who actually fired the shot) who might reveal the names of his associates; but without success. Thus, though one of the gang, in the first instance, had sufficient compunction of heart to seek to save the life of a really unoffending man, by giving timely notice of the plot laid for his destruction, he could not be tempted to go a step forwarder in the impeachment of his guilty associates. A county subscription was raised in favour of the widow of the murdered man, when a sum exceeding £200 was raised on her behalf. Garton was subsequently placed on the staff of the London Police, a situation he held for several years afterwards.

...

At the summer assizes came on for hearing, before Mr. Baron Graham, "The King versus Sutton." This was a criminal information, filed by the attorney-general, ex-officio , against Mr. Charles Sutton, proprietor of the Nottingham Review, for an alleged libel inserted in that newspaper during the month of October previous. Mr. Clarke, K.C., addressed the jury at great length, on the pernicious tendency of the libel, (contained in a letter to the editor) which he contended held up to contempt the proceedings of the king's executive government, stigmatised and degraded the British army, (who, by their heroic achievements, had so nobly upheld the honour and fame of their country,) and was calculated to excite disaffection, and encourage the Luddites to persevere in their lawless outrages, to the great injury of individuals, and the disturbance of the public peace. Mr. Denman (the late lord chief-justice) addressed the jury for more than two hours on behalf of the defendant. The speech of the learned gentleman throughout was able, eloquent, and argumentative, and to a very considerable degree may be justly considered as having first brought him into notice as an honest and powerful advocate of popular rights. His defence of the liberty of the press was at once elaborate, erudite, and searching, displaying great legal knowledge, a thorough acquaintance with cases and precedents, and a masterly dexterity in the employment of his facts and arguments, which thenceforward gave him extraordinary celebrity both with the public and the profession. A verdict of "Guilty," however, was returned against the defendant, who was ordered to appear at the Court of King's Bench on the first day of the next term, to receive judgment. When Michaelmas Term arrived, Mr. Denman obtained a rule, calling upon the crown to show cause why the verdict given at the assizes should not be set aside, and a new trial granted. The case was argued in January, 1816; Lord Ellenborough presided; and the attorney general, Mr. Clarke, Mr. Vaughan, and Mr. Balguy, severally showed cause against the rule; and Mr. Denman and Mr.

Phillips appeared in its support. The rule was discharged.

On the 9th of February, the defendant appeared in court to receive judgment. Mr. Denman addressed the court for more than an hour in his favour; and the attorney-general was heard in reply. Sentence was then pronounced by Mr. Justice Le Blanc; when he was ordered to be imprisoned in the gaol at Northampton for one year, and at the expiration of that time to give security for his good behaviour for three years; himself in £500, and two sufficient sureties in £250 each.

...

1816

...

On the morning of the 9th of June, about one o'clock, was accomplished, taking all its circumstances into account, one of the most important outrages in which the Luddites had hitherto been engaged; and which, eventually, contributed in no small degree, to bring their long continued and dangerous confederacy to an end. The circumstances of this case were somewhat as follows: At the time above specified, a party of men, disguised, made a forcible entry into the house of Mr. William Wright, of New Radford. Having obtained access, and procured a light, a portion of them, about seven in number, proceeded up stairs, and while their fellows kept watch below, demolished twelve valuable point-net lace machines; having accomplished which, in retaliation for the real or supposed infringement by Mr. Wright of some regulations which, in their conclave, had been deemed necessary for the maintenance of the integrity of the trade, the party immediately dispersed. The owner, or holder, of the property, happened not to be at home at the time the outrage was committed; but one of the workmen lodging in the house, who witnessed the whole transaction, feeling confident that he knew the persons of two of the assailants , gave such information as led to their apprehension.

The trial of these men, Thomas Glover and John Chettle, came on at the County Hall, before Mr. Justice Graham, on Saturday, the 3rd of August. The excitement among the working classes, most of whom deeply sympathised with the Luddites in the objects of their associating, was most intense. But strange to say, the very contrary of this feeling seemed to actuate the high-sheriff and his attendants; all of whom, as the evening advanced, (for the trial was protracted till two o'clock on Sunday morning, occupying the court during twelve hours) quitted their posts, and returned to their respective homes; leaving the judge, jury, counsel, and every one else connected with the prosecution, entirely at the mercy of an organized and infuriated mob. The indictment charged the prisoners with feloniously entering the dwelling-house of William Wright, and therein breaking and destroying twelve frames, employed in the making of point-net lace. Mr. Clarke and Mr. Reader were retained for the prosecution, and Mr. Denman sole counsel for the prisoners. The principal ground of defence was an alibi, and the evidence by which this was supported was certainly arranged with admirable skill, and maintained by the arguments of their advocate with almost more than his usual ability. Fortunately for the maintenance of the public peace, and the preservation of Nottingham from the foulest stigma which could possibly have attached to the character of the town, the result of the trial was a verdict of acquittal against both prisoners. Had it been otherwise, it may be received as certain that the most fearful consequences would have ensued, and that a British court of justice would have presented the shocking spectacle of a scene of all but indiscriminate murder. The body of the hall, with parts adjacent, was for hours in complete possession of a mass of determined, vindictive men, with passions inflamed by drink, and who would not suffer a light to appear within the hall, except just on the bench, and at the table around which the few counsel who remained in court were sitting. Even during the progress of the trial, and the summing up by the judge, expressions were given utterance to by the crowd around of the most insulting and not unfrequently fearful import. It was notorious, too, that great numbers of men within the precincts of the court were armed with pistols, blunderbusses, and other weapons, which they made no attempt to conceal. Nor were these demonstrations confined to the hall and its immediate vicinity, the whole adjacent streets (as the writer of this, from personal observation can testify) was lined with men, most of them armed with one description of implement of violence or another, and who kept constantly pacing about, as on watch to guard against surprise. Such was the state of affairs, as connected with this memorable trial, in the dead of the night, when the jury, after a short consultation, returned a verdict of Not Guilty. This announcement was received by the assembled multitude with a tremendous shout of exultation, which was doubled and re-doubled with a degree of frantic vociferation that almost shook the building itself. The shouts issuing from the hall were caught up by the crowds outside, and sent || pealing along the streets with a roll of thunder-like clamour, which soon informed the whole town of the result of the trial.

We profess not to call in question the propriety of the verdict, nor to insinuate that the evidence was neither sufficiently strong nor credible to warrant it; but we do venture to say that, in itself, the verdict was given really irrespective of either of these circumstances. The jury, whatever the nature of the evidence, dared not to have returned a verdict of Guilty. They, as may well be believed, were, during nearly the whole course of the proceedings, in the utmost degree of apprehension as to the difficulty and danger of their position. The nature of the evidence, and the skilful manner in which the case was conducted, afforded them an easy way of escaping from the dangers with which they were threatened, and they promptly availed themselves of its facilities; but had it not been so, it would be claiming almost too much for the firmness and integrity of an English jury of yeomen, who felt that they had no interest in these proceedings beyond that of supporting the common justice of the country, to suppose that they would have risked their lives in order to affirm the conviction of two offenders, whose outrages, or those of the class to which they belonged, little affected themselves or their own order. So serious was the alarm created by these disorders, and the dangers to which it was felt the court had been exposed, during the trial of these men, that it was in the contemplation of government to make Newark, in future, the assize town for the county, instead of continuing it, as heretofore, at the borough of Nottingham.

...

James Towle, a leading man among the Luddites, to whom reference has more than once been made in the various accounts recorded in these "Annals" of the proceedings of the lawless body with which he was associated, was executed at Leicester, on the 20th of November, for the crime of frame breaking.

Towle was a native of Basford, near Nottingham. He left a wife and four children, and was thirty-six years of age. The offence for which he suffered was committed at Loughborough.

The following is the account, as furnished by Mr. Sutton, of this transaction, at once the most daring and important of all the outrages committed by the Luddites, and which, more than any previous circumstance, served to arouse the whole locality to the necessity of putting an end, by every means possible, to this dangerous conspiracy of a body of hireling bravoes, as it was now evident they had become, against life and property: At midnight, on Friday, the 28th of June, a number of men, principally from the neighbourhood of Nottingham, entered the "casting-shop" attached to the rear part of Messrs. Heathcoat and Boden's lace factory, on the Ashby-road. In this small room were three watchers, John Asher, Thomas Ironman, and John Webster, workmen of the factory, the former of whom snatched up a pistol, and pointed it at the Luddites as they were coming in at the door, but though the trigger was pulled, it did not go off. One of the assailing party, in return, instantly fired at Asher with a blunderbuss, and inflicting a wound at the back of the head, rendered him insensible. Ironman was struck to the ground by a blow at the same moment; and Webster, who had run out of doors, in an endeavour to escape, was quickly brought back again, and placed in guard by the side of his companions. Some of the Luddites then, with lights in their hands, proceeded, without loss of time, through the large room, called the setting-up room," to the bottom of the staircase, where they knocked down a youth whom they met named Ambrose Woodford, placed over him a guard as they had done to the others, and then ran up to the "first floor." This consisted of three compartments, containing twenty-five machines, the whole of which they demolished, having previously secured, in one of the compartments, James Powell, William Soars, and John North, in the same way they had done the others. The adventurous men then directed their attention to the large room above, in which were thirty machines and five men, whose names were Joseph Sherwin, Samuel Street, William Squires, John Langham, and Thomas Smith. The first of these expressed to his associates a determination to resist the invaders, but, probably from being overheard, could not carry it out. The bold assailants succeeded in rendering them powerless with terror, by assuming on the staircase a sort of military tread, and one of them shouting, with stentorian voice, " Advance with the blunderbusses; more blunderbusses here." Having entered the room, the Luddites ordered the five men at once to prostrate themselves with their faces to the floor, and not to look about under pain of death, and guards were posted to enforce the imperious command. This preliminary being settled, the men proceeded with their work of devastation like furies; but after toiling for seven or eight minutes, as if animated by a common impulse, they suddenly stopped, and by listening for a few seconds, re-assuring themselves that all was right below, at it they went again with renewed eagerness, at the command of their leader, who vociferated, "All's well-Ned Ludd, do your duty well. It's a Waterloo job, by G-!" In about a quarter of an hour further, they finished their undertaking, having destroyed or rendered useless fifty-five machines, the value of which Mr. John Boden, one of the proprietors, estimated at £7,500.

Before quitting the factory, they enjoined the workmen, with most terrible threats, not to stir for the space of ten minutes, and one of them shook hands with Asher, the wounded man, and expressed a hope that he would soon get better. Independently of the Luddites who entered the factory, there were several accomplices outside, making, as was subsequently ascertained by the confession of several of them, the total number of seventeen.

James Towle was indicted at the Assizes, on the 10th of August, for having entered the premises, on the night in question, and discharged a pistol at Asher, with intent to murder him, and from the testimony of Asher and several of the factory-men, who appeared in evidence, he was adjudged guilty "of aiding and abetting, but not of firing the pistol." Mr. Baron Graham then sentenced him to be hung. The trial occupied fourteen hours. John Slater and Benjamin Badder, who were indicted with him on the same charge, were acquitted.

The circumstances that led to his conviction were these: During the attack on the factory, Towle was so reckless as to wear no other disguise than a silk handkerchief, tied round his lower jaw; this slipped down once or twice, and his peculiar contour of visage being fully exposed, was positively sworn to by two of the witnesses. He had also been heard to say, by Mr. James Lawson, the constable, on the Tuesday preceding the outrage, in a public-house, that there would be "a job before long; it will happen (he said) next Friday night, unless put off, and then it will happen on Saturday night." And to further strengthen the case against him, police-constable Benjamin Barnes deposed that, having seen a messenger Mr. Boden had despatched to the Nottingham Police Office, immediately on the outrage taking place, he set out at seven o'clock, through New Basford, where Towle lived, towards the Trent, near Beeston, and about eight o'clock succeeded in meeting the prisoner, on the highway in the latter village, coming in the direction from Loughborough; and though Towle turned his face towards the hedge, and tried to elude his recognition, he rode up to him, and persuaded him to join in drinking a glass of gin at a neighbouring public-house. His shoes were wet, and he looked fatigued.

The long interval, more than three months in duration, between the conviction and execution, was occasioned by an objection that Mr. Denman made at the trial, to the form of the indictment. The point in dispute was referred to the decision of the twelve judges, and was by them settled against the prisoner, on the 13th of November. Mr. Denman and Mr. Balguy were engaged for Towle; and Messrs, Vaughan, Copley, Clarke, Reader, and Reynolds for the prosecution.

On the morning of execution, the misguided man was conveyed in a chaise to "the new drop" at the Leicester County Goal. He ascended the platform at twelve o'clock, and after praying with the chaplain for a few minutes, advanced to the front, and with a firm and audible voice, gave out the whole of a hymn, by Dr. Watts, two lines at a time, and joined in singing it with the utmost fervour. The drop then fell. The corpse was buried at Basford, the following afternoon, in the presence of several thousand spectators.

Towle had been carefully brought up by honest and industrious parents, who, though in humble life, sought to bestow upon him an education, fully equal to, or beyond, their sphere in life, by sending him to one of the best day-schools in Nottingham, where he was school-fellow with the writer of this notice, Henry Kirke White, and a number of other boys of decent and respectable parentage. His progress in learning, however, was slow, because he always loved play rather than work, and pranks of mischievous enterprise rather than steady perseverance in well doing; and thence the crimes and disorders of his after-life.

...

In the latter part of this year, there being numerous robberies and disturbances, the provisions of the Watching and Warding Act were brought into operation. All male inhabitants of the town, rated to the relief of the poor, above the age of seventeen years, were subject to be called out, in parties of twenty-five each, and with a constable at their head, parade the streets, and keep watch throughout the night. The fine for neglect of duty was any sum the magistrates might think proper to impose, between 40s. and £10. This system of night police was continued till the following summer.

...

1817

On the 19th of February, Mr. Bragge Bathurst appeared at the bar of the House of Commons, with the report of the secret committee on the state of the country. That "report" represented that "a widely diffused ramification of a system of clubs, associated professedly for the purpose of parliamentary reform, upon the most extended principle of universal suffrage and annual parliaments, existed in the country, particularly in the great manufacturing districts of Lancashire, Leicestershire, Nottinghamshire, and Derbyshire." The "report," which was of great length, then goes on to say, "Whatever may be the object of these clubs in general, your committee have no hesitation in saying, from information on which they place the fullest reliance, that in far the greatest number of them, and which are composed of the lower order of artisans, nothing short of a revolution is the object expected and avowed." On the 24th of February, Lord Sidmouth, in the House of Lords, and Viscount Castlereagh in the House of Commons, brought forward measures for "the temporary suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act; the extension of the Act of 1795 for the security of his majesty's person, to his royal highness the Prince Regent and for embodying into one act, the provisions of certain acts relative to tumultuous meetings, debating societies bound together by secret oaths, or by fraternized branches over the kingdom." The same day these measures were introduced into parliament, a numerously attended public meeting was held in Nottingham, at which a petition was resolved upon, calling upon the House of Commons "to pause ere it undertook the dangerous and unconstitutional procedure of suspending the liberties of the people, on vague and *ex parte* information, obtained from spies and informers." Events, threatening the entire overthrow and final destruction of that system of lawless outrage, which for several years had disgraced and disturbed the town of Nottingham and its vicinity, now began to thicken around the deluded and dangerous body of men by whom the vengeance of the law had been so long set at defiance.

On the 18th of March, Daniel Diggle, aged 21, was arraigned before Mr. Baron Richards, at the County Hall, charged with shooting at George Kerry, of Aspley-lane, in the parish of Radford, with intent to kill him, or do him some grievous bodily harm. It was proved that on the evening of Sunday, the 22nd of the preceding December, Diggle, accompanied by William Burton, and two other men, named Henfrey and Wolley, went to the house of Kerry, who occupied a cottage in Aspley-lane, near to the Hall, where he employed two or three frames, in the working of which some offence had been given to the Basford Luddites: a plot was therefore laid to settle the matter in dispute, by shooting Kerry, on the following Sunday evening, in his own house; and the men above named (a band of reckless, daring fellows, as any in the county) undertook to carry the work of assassination into execution. At the time the outrage was committed, Kerry was seated by his fireside; three females-his mother, (a poor, blind old woman) his wife, (in a very delicate state of health) and his wife's sister-being also in the house. Diggle and another entered the dwelling, their faces covered with black crape, or silk handkerchiefs, whilst the other two guarded the premises from intruders. So soon as Diggle, who carried a large pistol, entered the doorway, Kerry rose from his seat, and attempted to grapple with him, when the ruffian discharged the pistol, as he supposed, straight at the head of his victim, who fell to the ground wounded, but not mortally; on which the assassin, with his companions, decamped from the spot with all speed; and would perhaps, but for a subsequent outrage, have remained undiscovered.

Impunity in the frequent commission of daring outrages, had, at length, rendered these lawless men so void of apprehension as to consequences, that, on the night of the 2nd of January, Diggle, in company with men named Blackborne, Burton, Mellors, Austin, his brother Nathan, Henfrey, Wolley, and Shaw, while out on a poaching excursion near Trowell, wantonly beset the house of Mr. William Cook, of Shortwood, Lord Middleton's gamekeeper, and fired at him several times, through his bedroom window. Diggle and several others being arrested for this offence, began to impeach each other, and William Burton, who was one of them, was admitted as king's evidence, and ensured Diggle's conviction on the charge of shooting at Kerry. Towle, during his long imprisonment, had also made a disclosure of the names of his accomplices; so that the authorities, being now fully assured they were on the right track, made a vigorous stroke, and secured nearly the whole of the men engaged in the Loughborough outrage. Fears of an attempt at rescue being entertained, it was resolved to execute Diggle in front of the County Gaol. This arrangement was carried into effect on the 2nd ofApril.

We now approach the final catastrophe of Luddism. On the 31st of March, and 1st of April, John Clarke, Thomas Savidge, William Withers, John Amos, John Crowther, Joshua Mitchell, William Towle, and James Watson, were convicted at Leicester, before the Hon. Sir R. Richards, of being concerned in the attempt to shoot John Asher, at Loughborough, on the premises of Messrs. Heathcote and Boden, before alluded to. John Blackborne, of Lambley, and William Burton, two accomplices, were the chief witnesses against them.

The former of the two acknowledged that it was himself who fired at Asher, without the connivance or consent of any of the rest. Clarke and Watson were reprieved. The Leicester Chronicle described the execution of the others, as follows:

> About half-past five o'clock on Thursday morning, April 17th, the under-mentioned unfortunate men were removed from the County Gaol, in a covered cart, escorted by a squadron of Hussars, to the New Bridewell, adjoining the Infirmary, where they immediately proceeded to prayer, and continued very devoutly engaged during the greater part of the morning. About twelve o'clock they made their appearance on the platform, chained together by the wrist. Savidge was placed first; Mitchell, second; Amos, third; Towle, fourth; Crowther, fifth; and Withers, sixth. Almost throughout the whole of the awful ceremony they conducted themselves with a degree of firmness seldom witnessed on such a melancholy occasion. Though not insensible to religious impressions, they appeared to wait their approaching end with a degree of composure we scarcely know how to express. Savidge was a fine, tall, well-dressed, sensible-looking man, and appeared to be offering up his prayers with great earnestness when he was tied up. Mitchell, a well-made, bold-looking, well-dressed man, did not appear quite so devout. He assisted in adjusting Savidge's rope, as well as his own, with an unexampled coolness, worthy of a better fate. Amos, a tall, strong, decently-dressed man, witnessed his fate with a smile upon his countenance, and seemed to be a man possessing great strength of mind. Towle, a fresh-looking youth, betrayed no symptoms of agitation, until towards the close of the tragic scene, when, on the cap being pulled over his face, he evidently seemed much affected.

Crowther also seemed much agitated towards the last, as did Withers a little, which he evinced by a restlessness in standing. A troop of Hussars were in attendance on the above occasion, and, we understand, the Yeomanry Cavalry been made. Happily the whole passed over without interruption. The malefactors gratefully acknowledged having experienced every accommodation which the humanity of the high-sheriff and the gaoler was capable of affording under their circumstances. The bodies of these victims were placed in shells, and put into two carts, in which they were taken to Nottingham for interment.

They arrived at that place on Friday morning, about three o'clock. Mitchell, Amos, Withers, and Crowther, were interred in St. Mary's church-yard; the former (Mitchell) at about five in the morning; the three latter about five in the afternoon; and Savidge was interred in the New Burying-ground, about the same hour as the latter, amidst vast concourses of people. Towle was taken forward to Chilwell, where his friends resided. Savidge (aged 39) left a wife and five children; Amos (aged 30) a wife and five children; Mitchell (aged 29) unmarried; Withers (aged 33) a wife and one child; Crowther (aged 40) a wife and five children; these were natives of Nottingham: and Towle (aged 22) a wife and one child, a native of Chilwell.

Nothing could exceed the consternation of hundreds, yea, we might almost say thousands, of persons in Nottingham, upon first learning the fact that such men as Savidge, Mitchell, Crowther, and some others named, were leading perpetrators of the outrages by which Luddism had latterly become distinguished; they had been all well brought up-had each received a decent education, according to their class and rank in life, and were looked upon, by society in general, as respectable well-conducted men.

On the 7th of November, the extraordinary spectacle was presented, in the provinces, of three men being executed for high treason: these were Jeremiah Brandreth, ("the Nottingham Captain," as he was called) William Turner, and Isaac Ludlam. The following account of the events which preceded the capture of these miserable men is taken entire, or with a few verbal alterations, from Mr. J. F. Sutton's Date Book.

The long connexion of Mr. Sutton and his family with the public press of the district, having afforded them peculiar facilities for gathering up all the particulars connected with this lamentable affair, we have thought it better to depend upon their report, more especially as it appears to be written with great fairness and correctness, than to depend upon our own notes and recollections.

These men were the victims of an odious system of espionage, and the crime for which they suffered was occasioned and fomented in a great measure by an infamous man named Oliver, who was employed by the Sidmouth-Castlereagh government, as an agent or spy in the north-midland districts .

The contemptible insurrection which the three victims headed, originated among the labouring population of Pentridge, South Wingfield, and Wingfield Park, in the county of Derby, a district that could little be suspected as likely to become the focus of treason and rebellion, the population being generally well disposed; and, therefore, it is rational to conclude that no ordinary deceptions were practised on them, to cause a departure from their peaceful habits and contented homes. How they became the willing instruments of villainy, it is difficult to state; it is true, there was to some extent disaffection to the existing state of things, owing to the recent enactment of a prohibitive corn law, and great distress, but this is not sufficient to account for overt acts of rebellion. It was, however, fully ascertained that they were deluded by men who were in correspondence with Oliver, and who were consequently his dupes.

Jeremiah Brandreth, better known by the name of "the Nottingham Captain," has been described as one of those original characters for whom nature had done much, and education nothing. Of his parents or early habits little is known. He had been in the army, and had resided subsequently, with his wife and three children, at Sutton-in-Ashfield. His age was not more than six and twenty; yet he evidently possessed an influence of command, and resolution, almost irresistible to men of less firmness. His eye was black and piercing, and his whole face indicated a character of daring intrepidity, and decision of no ordinary kind. The associates of this man were less remarkable. William Turner lived in the village of South Wingfield, and was in decent circumstances, and well respected; his age was 46. Isaac Ludlam, whose age was 52, also possessed the esteem of his neighbours; he had been the owner by inheritance of a small property, and had rented several small farms; but, speculating imprudently, had lost everything, and in an evil hour was induced to join in Brandreth's desperate attempt.

These insurgents acted under a complete illusion. Formal statements of the numbers of the disaffected were given to them by the tools of Oliver, as well as of the quantities of arms and stores with the "provisional government," the members of which were to declare themselves the moment the people came out. Oliver himself, whose head-quarters, when in Nottingham, was the Blackmoor's Head Inn, had been heard to say, when assembled with Brandreth and a few others in a private room at the Three Salmons public-house, that "he had been round the circuit at Manchester, and in Yorkshire, and was then going to London, by way of Birmingham. Every person, he said, was completely ready to rise, and he could raise 70,000 in London. That the people in London would not be satisfied unless Nottingham was perfectly secured, for it was the rallying point for Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, and Leicestershire; and that if it was not secured the passage over the Trent would be perfectly stopped to the northern forces . That they must proceed forward to London as soon as they could raise sufficient men against the loyalists; and that Nottingham was to be continually occupied by northern forces in succession." He said further, "London is now quite ripe. I am sent down to see that all is ready. They can hardly be kept down in Yorkshire and Lancashire, they are so anxious to begin!" Such were the wicked and extravagant falsehoods by which the poor men were lured into the very jaws of destruction.

Monday, the 9th of June, was fixed upon for "the general rising," in the counties of Lancaster, York, Derby, and Nottingham. Immense bodies of men, armed with guns, pikes, and other offensive weapons, were to have marched out of Lancashire and Yorkshire, over the north-eastwardly side of Derbyshire, and the westwardly side of Nottinghamshire, into the town of Nottingham. They were to have forced into their service every person found on their march, and to have provided further supplies of arms, particularly guns, which they were most in want of, by taking them from private houses, and depôts of military stores. They were to have stopped in Nottingham, and to have established a provisional government, until they heard of the success of similar operations in other parts of the kingdom, and a convention was then to be held for the formation of a national constitution. This was the design: we have now to see how miserably it failed in execution.

Between eleven and twelve at night, Turner, Ludlam, and forty or fifty associates, from Pentridge, Alfreton, and South Wingfield, armed with pikes, and a few guns, assembled in Wingfield Park, under the command of Brandreth, who had been with them at the "White Horse," Pentridge, the day before, drilling them into a knowledge of his plans. Having formed into order, they marched to a farm-house, where they expected to meet with another body of insurgents, but not doing so, they went from house to house, seizing guns wherever they could find them, and pressing the occupants to join their ranks: if the head of the house objected to go with them, his son, if he had one, was to go in his place, and if he had not a son, they took a servant-man.

A gun and a man at every house was what they insisted upon having, and when they had secured them, as they did in many instances, they would not trust the gun in the man's hand, but gave him a pike, and transferred the gun to one of their own party. After calling at the house of Mr. Thompson, they halted in one of his closes, expecting there to be joined by another division, but as it did not come, they despatched a part of their "army," under the command of George Weightman, towards Pentridge, to see if the expected reinforcements were in sight. The main body proceeding onwards, called at several farm-houses, and a Mr. Walker having delivered up a brace of pistols, Brandreth stuck them into his belt, which was simply a leather apron twisted round his waist. At Mrs. Hepworth's, on their arrival at the house, they knocked at the door, and made a great noise, but the widow discharged her son and the two men-servants from opening it. The result was, that a forcible entrance was made, and that Brandreth shot Robert Walters, one of the servant-men, dead on the spot. At Mr. Fletcher's, where they next called, they were rejoined by the detachment headed by Weightman. The Butterley ironworks were the next point of attack, but Mr. C. Goodwin, a manager under Mr. Jessop, remonstrating with them very firmly, they turned away. At this point, their number, notwithstanding numerous desertions of pressed men, had increased to about one hundred, and they marched away as they came, in regular order, two and two, each one carrying either a gun or a pike. They then began to doubt whether everything was as right as they had been led to suppose, and concluded to send for intelligence; they therefore seized the nearest horse they could find, and sent George Weightman with it to Nottingham for that purpose. Codnor was the next place to which the insurgents proceeded, and here their numbers were augmented by recruits from Swanwick, Ripley, and neighbouring places. Again forming into rank, they went on to Langley Mill. Here the first streaks of day were seen in the east, and here many of the misguided men, struck with shame or fear, dropped to the rear, or slipped away on either side; others, however, kept coming up to supply their places, and the main body was now about two hundred strong. In this force they entered Nottinghamshire, at Eastwood.

At this juncture, Brandreth came up with Weightman, who had returned from Nottingham, and whether from a wish to deceive, or from having received false information, does not clearly appear, the courier certainly revived their infatuation by reporting that the troops would not stir a foot to meet them; that Nottingham was in the hands of their friends; but if they intended they should keep it, they must hasten to their assistance; and then the day was their own! Hurrahs and every other wild cry of exultation ran like a fire of joy from front to rear, and onwards they again marched.

Leaving the "Regenerators," as they styled themselves, for a few moments at this stage of their enterprise, it is necessary to show what was the actual state of affairs in the town towards which they were marching, and whether preparations had been made for their reception. Oliver had plied his questionable vocation here, but not with equal success. His dupes lacked the confidence necessary for taking the field; and though there was a considerable amount of disaffection amongst the starving population, yet, beyond a little tampering with the soldiery, and an indulgence, in imagination, in several bold designs, such as blowing up the Barracks, and sacking the gunsmiths' shops, little was thought of, and still less attempted. As the night of the 9th drew on, a good deal of agitation was observable, and a very unusual number of people thronged the streets, but most of them were drawn together by curiosity, expecting some disturbance, though they scarcely knew what or why The only alleged actual breach of the peace, of any consequence, took place on the Forest. Mr. William Roper, who lived at the Stand, near the Race-course, stated that he had been that evening at the "Duke of York" public-house, in York-street, Nottingham, and left it about half-past eleven, for the purpose of going home. He passed a great many men in crossing the Forest, and was cautioned against entering the Stand. In one place there were about a hundred, standing in line, two deep, and part of them armed with either poles or pikes. With great difficulty he managed to pass them, and get into the Stand. He then observed about the same number of armed men form into a line, under the piazzas and shed of the building. Knocking at the door, they demanded the arms of which they supposed the Stand was a depôt, but Roper assuring them that there were only a rifle and a fuzee in his custody, the men, after some further parleying, withdrew, and nothing further occurred.

And this was all the foundation there was for Weightman's report the town had been taken! So far indeed from this being the case, the authorities were fully on the alert, and thoroughly acquainted with the insurgents' plans and movements.

Throughout the whole of Sunday, the 8th, until a late hour at night, and during Monday and the night following, the town magistrates sat at the Police Office, without intermission, to receive communications and act accordingly. Special constables were enrolled in great numbers, and the 15th Hussars, at the Barracks, were ordered to be ready to act at a moment's notice. The county magistrates were also assembled in conclave, and the 95th Regiment of Foot, and the Holme and Newark troops of Yeomanry Cavalry, were on duty close at hand. And as if this formidable force were not sufficient, the Leicestershire Yeomanry were up in readiness to reach Nottingham on a very short notice, by forced march.

Information of the entrance of the insurgents into the county was conveyed to the Police Office, at an early hour in the morning, by Colonel Rolleston, of Watnall, who, having ridden out on horseback, and ascertained that considerable alarm prevailed at Eastwood, and that men in bodies were out with pikes, thought it his duty to ride over to Nottingham. Securing the assistance of C. G. Mundy, Esq. , one of the county justices, and of eighteen Hussars, commanded by Captain Phillips and several officers, he immediately returned, to endeavour to stop the progress of the rebel forces.

In the meantime, a great change had come over the fortunes of the ill-fated expedition. The cheers that burst forth on the wicked announcement that Nottingham was secured had scarcely died away, ere a deep feeling of painful anxiety on the face of Weightman, and rumours of the military having been sent for, again engendered distrust and doubt. Everything began to look discouragingly. Rain in heavy showers cooled their ardour-people everywhere dinned in their ears the unpleasant idea that they were going with halters around their necks, and it demanded continual doses of eloquence from their leaders, and strong potations of ale at every public-house they came near, to keep them at all together.

Avery few seconds more utterly dissipated whatever hope even the most sanguine of the insurgents might have cherished. Many slunk away-all looked jaded with mental and bodily fatigue-some sleepy-others stupified with too much beer; and it required all the sternness of Brandreth, and all his powers of command-his taunts and jeers, and fleers and burning indignation-and all his old invective against tyrants-to get them to preserve any semblance whatever of marching order. John Bacon, their most violent orator, and some other leaders, had disappeared; and reluctantly, slowly, at a funeral pace, they took their way over the Common, their ranks dwindling at every lane and gate they came near, till, on surmounting the highest point, called Hill Top, their number had shrunk to about forty; and to their dismay, the first thing they saw on gaining this eminence, was a glimpse in the far distance of what their fears had most dreaded, the Hussars riding rapidly towards them. In vain did Brandreth try to rally his disorganized forces, and call upon them to meet the attack of the "dastardly soldiery;" dropping their pikes, and pitchforks, and guns, they took to their heels, and fled most hastily in every direction but that in which the troops were coming. The miserable men were actively pursued, and between Kimberley and Langley Mill, Colonel Rolleston, and the soldiers with him, succeeded in apprehending about thirty.

Securing them in a waggon and cart, along with a quantity of pikes and guns found on the road, at six o'clock, p.m., they were brought to Nottingham, and lodged in the County Gaol. In the course of the next two or three days, others of the deluded insurgents were arrested, and taken to Derby. Brandreth managed to elude his pursuers longer than most of them. On the desertion of his men, he left the highway, and proceeding over hedge and ditch, secreted his gun in the fence of a field occupied by a Mr. Green, of Kimberley. After a variety of narrow escapes, he was concealed at Bulwell, by an acquaintance, until a reward of fifty pounds was offered for his discovery, when it is understood he was betrayed by his treacherous friend, who informed Colonel Rolleston of his place of concealment. The result was, two gamekeepers were sent to the house, under the pretence of searching for snares, and Brandreth was apprehended.

In the month of October following, the prisoners were arraigned at Derby, by virtue of a special commission, before Sir R. Richards, Sir R. Dallas, Sir C. Abbot, and Sir G. Holroyd, Knts. Mr. Cross and Mr. Denman appeared as their counsel. After protracted trials, the result was as follows:-Brandreth, Turner, Ludlam, George Weightman, and nineteen others, (whose sentences were subsequently commuted into transportation) were found guilty, and had sentence of death pronounced upon them as traitors. The rest, to their great astonishment, were liberated.

Weightman was sufficiently fortunate to receive a reprieve, but the others suffered the extremity of the law on the day already intimated. The scaffold was erected in Nun's-green, and was guarded by a strong detachment of the Enniskillen Dragoons, special constables, and javelin-men. While the ropes were being adjusted, the men attributed their position to Oliver, Castlereagh, and the government. Turner and Ludlam displayed considerable emotion; but Brandreth was perfectly composed.

The leader of this outbreak, though himself grievously misled, was unquestionably a man of no ordinary stamp. Never, perhaps, did the personal appearance of an individual, in a court of justice, arrest the attention of persons of all ranks who witnessed his behaviour, more than that of Jeremiah Brandreth.

Mr. Denman, after the conviction of Brandreth, in closing his address to the jury, in the case of Isaac Ludlam, thus alludes to him: "But the influence which this 'Nottingham Captain' was likely to have upon the prisoner, and men of his order, the jury would, he hoped, duly consider. The captain was, indeed, a most extraordinary character. There was a wild daring in his look, a desperate decision in his manner, and a furious energy in his conduct, which bespoke the man capable of a commanding influence over common minds. That influence was indeed to be recognised in every part of the transactions that originated these trials. But the eye of the man eloquently expressed the spirit, resolution, and activity, which he had succeeded in communicating to those who acted under his direction. Everywhere he was active, decisive, and commanding." The learned gentleman then drew a comparison between Brandreth and Conrad, the dark and desperate hero of Byron's tale of The Corsair; quoting-a very unusual circumstance in a court of justice-thirty lines from the poem in confirmation of the justness of the parallel; and concluded this part of his address by saying, "he was sure the gentlemen of the jury would excuse the length of the quotation, and concur with him in thinking that the noble poet must have taken for his model some striking resemblance to the 'Nottingham Captain'."

Had a breaking up of the political institutions of Britain been the result of these movements, there can be little doubt but that in the person of Jeremiah Brandreth would have been found one of those bold men, whose deeds of daring, restless energy, and impurturbable self-possession, amidst scenes of difficulty and danger, enable them, by the influence they thus obtain in the direction of public affairs, to stamp on the age to which they belong the enduring impress of their own lofty spirits. The last moments of this extraordinary man were in perfect keeping with his whole previous behaviour, during the time he had been under the public eye. The chaplain of the prison declared that in the whole of his experience he had never met with a man about to lay down his life under circumstances so peculiarly terrific, who could appear so little distressed, and whose mind was so completely made up to meet death without dismay. In conversing with the prisoner, he expressed surprise at finding him thus. Brandreth replied, that "he felt himself supported beyond expectation; that he had no fear; and did not at all shrink from the idea of mounting the scaffold." The reverend gentleman then endeavoured to obtain from him some particulars of his past life. All inquiries, however, of this nature he steadily eluded; refusing to tell even who and what his parents had been. The minister next endeavoured to impress him with a due sense of the guilt he had incurred in shedding the blood of a fellow-creature: on this subject, at least, he suggested a full confession ought to be made. Brandreth was here as impenetrable as ever: "he had," he said, "endeavoured to make his peace with God, and he did not see that it was necessary for him to make any statement for the satisfaction of man;" repeating that "he had no reluctance to mount the scaffold, and felt no dread of the morrow."

In the last trying scene Brandreth appeared as perfectly composed as heretofore; and when the bolt was withdrawn, he fell still, and died without any visible emotion, or agitation of the body, as though the proud spirit within was capable of keeping in subjection any expression of outward suffering, even in the pangs of a violent death. After hanging about half an hour, the corpse was cut down, and the head severed from the body; after which the executioner took it up by the hair, and exhibiting it to the multitude, exclaimed, "Behold the head of the traitor, Jeremiah Brandreth!" The same was done to Ludlam and Turner. Such was the end of the "Nottingham Captain," and his deluded followers. They were buried altogether, without any funeral ceremony, in a deep grave in St. Werburgh's Church-yard, Derby.