# A History of the Framework Knitting and Lace Trade

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001100/18300108/007/0001
Nottingham Review - Friday 08 January 1830

TO LACE MANUFACTURERS, HOSIERS, LACE-MAKERS AND FRAMEWORK-KNITTERS

On Monday next, Jan. 11, 1830, will bv published, AND MAY BE HAD AT THE REVIEW OFFICE, PRICE TWOPENCE, No. 9 of A HISTORY OF THE FRAMEWORK-KNITTING AND LACE TRADES, From the earliest invention, the Rev. Wm. I^ec, in 1389, until the year IS'K), At a period like tiie present, when the greatest distress prevails throughout the Midland Counties, it has been thought, by numbers of well-informed persons, to be absolutely necessary to trace the causes that distress, which is overwhelming the nation; more especially, as the most erroneous notions have gone abroad, respecting the trade of these counties, as to the object of the working classes to put down Machinery, and iu prevent improvements. The object of the above arduous work will be, by a faithful narrative of the last years, to rescue the character of the merchant ami workman from the obloquy thrown upon them, in consequence their opposition the new system, of destroying every legal restriction, and letting the concerns of trade to anarrhy and (as is now proved) to destruction, suffering every thing respecting trade and manutactures (save and except to revenue enactments) to find their own level. pursuance of this design, the work will con* tain a taithful narrative, from the traditions the early stocking-makers in the South of of the invention, and the difficulties which Mr. Lee encountered in the discovery of the knitting frame, until its perfection, in its present shape, in the reign of Queen Anne, alter a senes of improvements made during IA) years. In the course of which will described the emigration of. Ma-. Lee, the solicitation of the French (»uvernment; the seducing of the frame work-knitters to emigrate, by foreign ambassadors; with the charter and laws made to prevent the practice. the course of the work will lie given account of the inventions of the various machines, from the tuck-presser. in 1740, to the rotary iacc machines of the present day, including the various fashion.', modes work, and other useful niatier. This work will also contain a careful and select abridgement of the laws respecting masters, workmen, and apprentices; as also tbe various Jaws respecting paying wages, finishing work, and combination and revenue laws which concern the knitting ami lace trades. A lull account will be given of vac'ious applications made to Parliament, regulate the trade, in |72!i, IJoJ. 1779, which will given tbe speeches of tbe Members, tbe interviews with them and the Ministers, and aJI other neceaMary and useful information. 'i’llis work will also contain a candid and true narration all the riou which taken place respecting tbe disjiutes in the trade, including frame-breaking London in ; the riots in Devonshire which gave rise tbe first frame-breaking act; the riots and frame-breaking Arnold, in 1779; the riots Leicestershire, from 17-SOto the frame-breaking 17N7 ; riots of the troopers and stock!tigers tin* twilled riot in 179.»; the riot and Irame-breaking at Arnold, Silicon, &C. in 1812; the frame-breaking at BulwHl. in November, 1812 ; with the whole acts the Luddites, in years 1812-lfi. including the acts of the rioters, machine-breakings, and burning tiie mills, in the counties of \ ork. Lancashire, and Cheshire, with a faithful narration of the causes which led those disturbances, traced Irum the earliest periods; the not and inarch ol Jeremiah Hrandreth ana his Derbyshire 10l lowers; the projected riot of the meeting Nottingham forest; in ivbirli will included narrative the Manchester Nanketersthe suspension the Habeas Corpus act —the im(.risoiiinenf under that act—the spy system, carried on Oliver, Mradbury, and several inhabitants Nottingham and its vicinity—the secret means Used the instigators are developed and exposed—and all other mutters connected with the riots of the trace, will impartially and coolly lie various trials for will also be given, including the trial Mepliringham. in 17/9, for pulling down house; the various pro-editions under the combination acts ; trials lor Luddism, Nottingham, Derby, and Leicester; tlie trial Bacon, ami the Derbyshire rioters ; the Inal Simpson, lorlelony; the trial Dingle, lor phootwig; ami other criminal trials respecting the trade. I'iie various excciitimis Siinj son, Dingle, and Towle—the executions at Leicester, and those at Derby, will tlescri‘»ed, will the execution the rioters in Lancashire. Yorkshire, and Cheshire. various civil actions will ,11 in the trials respecting the ciiarter. those res}K“ctiug the various patent', and the prosecutions •ctmg emlwazleinent. paying in goods, su-aliug hosiery and lace. &c. succinct account will b<* given of the history of the trade in Ireland and Scotland, a quantiiy of uselul inrormation. statement will also tie given of the rise and progress the trade trance, tlte state of the machinei ; the law s and the conduct oi Rooaparte towards the Frencii working ciassc* ; also the conduct now pursued the French government, as to manufactures, including the present slate of the lace trade in and containing narrative ol the adventures ol sever ; I k men at Lyons. Castres, Fans, Calais. Lisle, ixc. account the state ol the trade will given, in Spain, Italy, Switzerland, Saxony, (icemany. Oeninat k, and the l States; to which will added, account tin* larill’s a:ul cusloirs which alicct the trade Kiiglaiid >ll lorcigu siau^a. I'«tt rent. Lignum’s Antiscorbutic Drops. 