# A history of the machine-wrought hosiery and lace manufactures

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oWfzzfjMa6k

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o_wMGYUPUJ4

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xwy65rhxW40


https://archive.org/details/historyofmachine00felkuoft/page/n291/mode/2up?q=%22cut-up%22+%22wide-frame%22
A history of the machine-wrought hosiery and lace manufactures
by Felkin, William

Publication date 1867

pp227-242

Chapter XVI. Luddism

THE war of 1803 brought yearly increase of taxation, and, being attended by bad harvests, the whole nation suffered, but especially the midland district. The times became troublesome and dangerous, issuing in the revival of Luddism. Frame breaking, as a mode of intimidating employers into compliance with the views and wishes of their workpeople, did not originate in the midland counties and in the present century, as is generally supposed, but was practised in London at least 150 years ago, when the disputes which had occurred for some years respecting the number of apprentices taken by master stocking-makers, came to a point, because one Nicholson had gotten very many of them. The unemployed and irritated journeymen proceeded to break about 100 frames thus worked by him and others, throwing them out of the windows, beating both the obnoxious masters and their apprentices. This occurred about the year 1710, and was confined to Old Street Square, Bunhill Row and the neighbourhood in St. Luke's, Shoreditch, and Cripplegate. The masters were deterred by these proceedings, and agreed to abide by the trade rules as to apprentices in future; while none of the rioters were punished, it is said not even apprehended. But one of the masters who had thus promised, named Fellows, decided to remove his frames to Nottingham, where he set at nought the rules, and, it is said, had at one time forty-nine apprentices, of whom many were bound by their parishes to him; the practice being to pay at least £5 each to the masters on thus getting rid of them.

This system of apprenticing by parishes to the weaving trades throughout the country, besides causing much suffering and demoralization to the oppressed and friendless youths of both sexes who were its victims, gradually so overloaded the trade with wandering unemployed journeymen, as to cause serious riots in various manufacturing populations.

A committee of the House of Commons, after sitting to hear evidence on the subject, instead of stopping the malpractices of parish officers, passed an act in 1727 punishing with death those who destroyed the machinery used in making cloth or hosiery of woollen materials. Whether from the terrible penalty thus threatened, or the greater area over which frame-work-knitting was rapidly spreading in England, acts of violence to the persons or property of hosiery employers seem to have practically ceased for forty years. Though the trade was manifestly leaving London, there were still colonies of stocking-makers here and there; one of the latest of which was located in Spitalfields, where the frames chiefly made silk hose; and thus were nearly allied as to materials with the staple weaving trade of that district. The latter was much excited in 1770 on account of depression of wages, and which were sought to be raised by the terror arising from nightly destruction of the warps in those looms, the wages for weaving in which were paid for at an under price. These nefarious proceedings were largely aided by the neighbouring frame-work-knitters. Some of the silk weaving rioters were taken, convicted, and hanged in front of the doors of the houses where the offences were committed. The London stocking-makers were greatly deterred by this severity from such lawless proceedings in future. Besides the Spitalfields' act, another was passed empowering justices to regulate wages, and if needs be to raise them — a measure which was not repealed until 1824.

The riotous spirit was not laid at rest; it had only migrated into the midland district of England. Two bills having been rejected in 1778-9, which had for their object the regulation of apprenticeships and prevention of fraudulent work, chiefly upon the evidence of Mr. Need and some other hosiers, the country stockingers flocked into Nottingham, their frames were thrown broken into the streets, and a house was burnt down between 10th and 19th June, 1779. Much other property belonging to obnoxious hosiers was destroyed. The riot act was read, and soldiers were called out. Such was the effect upon the minds of the authorities as well as the hosiers, that at the instance of the former, the latter, on 19th June, declared themselves unanimously determined as a body, provided an immediate cessation of violence took place, to remove every oppression from their workmen, and to bring all the manufacturers up to a fair price, not the highest rate, but the best generally given." Upon this peace was restored. A man, Mephringham, was tried at the assizes for aiding in burning the house, but was acquitted : upon which this sad conflict was allowed to come to an end. On this occasion about 300 stocking-frames belonging to Need and others were broken, they having been mostly employed in making spurious and, as it was then and up to 1850 generally considered by the workpeople, fraudulent work.

In 1773, a newly invented stocking-machine was taken out of the Exchange at Leicester by a mob and destroyed, in spite of the entreaties of the mayor and others. Also Coltman and Gardiner, wool combers of Leicester, had a man in their employ in 1788, who invented the present mode of spinning animal wool by machinery into worsted yarn, applying the principle embodied in Arkwright's cotton spinning frames. To this man, named Brookhouse, the Leicester woollen hosiery trade is indebted for laying the foundation for much of its great extent and flourishing condition. His new plan was approved and taken up by Messrs. Coltman and Whetstone, two of the largest makers of worsted yarn in Leicester, and machinery was constructed to carry it into effect. But it was all destroyed by a mob of workpeople, together with the dwellings of Coltman and Whetstone. Before the riot could be quelled the military were brought into the affray, and blood was shed.

Thus the use of this important process was driven from Leicester at that time into Worcestershire, Yorkshire, and even to Aberdeen; from which parts for the next forty years, Leicester hosiers had to obtain much of the materials they worked up. Meantime Mr. Brookhouse set up his machinery at Warwick, and worked upon his invention with such success as to gain a fortune, upon which he retired.

A list of prices, which had been agreed to in 1787 by both masters and men, had been in the main adhered to during the following twenty years, when from rapidly decreasing demand lessened prices for goods and consequent pressure upon the workmen ensued. In 1809 several hosiers, amongst whom were Haynes, Nelson, Brocksopp, and Eaton, agreed to reduce their wages 3s. per dozen if the workmen would not or could not obtain a reduction of frame rents, and the entire cessation of cut up spurious work. To these two things the workmen were very heartily opposed; but at a time when they could only get scanty labour if any, such as was within their reach, however ill remunerated, was not to be rejected. The time and circumstances on which the author is now entering, he himself passed through, and he has a most painful and vivid recollection of them. The fear of an entire cessation of demand in the markets of North America, the heavy burden of war taxation and the loans necessary for national purposes, left manufacturers everywhere only confined means, and lowered credit. In the hosiery districts the warehouses were full of goods. How many thousands of times was that cry repeated — "Give us work at any price; half a loaf is better than no bread!" It was a heavy cry uttered too often ever to be forgotten. The years 1811-12 were sorely distressful, and even dangerous in a high degree throughout the three midland counties. There was as little unity of opinion amongst the hosiers as to the causes of the difficulty under which all were labouring, as amongst the men. The higher class of employers paying best wages and making the best goods, eschewing altogether the manufacture of the spurious cut up goods, laid the larger part of the blame on their lower competitors giving less wages, making worse goods, underselling them, and destroying what little confidence buyers who still possessed means had in making purchases. The misery of the poor dependants on wages which when at work were reduced to an average of about 7s. a-week, but often not now in their power to earn, rapidly drew towards the point that passes endurance, as the close of the year 1810 approached. So great and rapid was its progress during the next year, that the number of unemployed families relieved from the poor rates of the three parishes in Nottingham on the 30th January, 1812, was 4248, including 15,350 persons, or nearly one half of the then population. For twelve months past many working men had swept the streets in Nottingham, Leicester, and Derby, receiving a scanty eleemosynary pittance for their labour. Threats of vengeance had been loudly uttered against hosiers paying reduced wages. Early in March, 1811, many of these men came in from all parts of the county, and proceeded to carry their threats into execution. There was an assemblage in Nottingham market-place. The military appeared, so there were no acts of violence attempted in the town. But sixty-three frames, chiefly belonging to Messrs. Bolton, were destroyed at Arnold that night. Two hundred more were broken in the next three weeks. These things were done no doubt by persons led on by able, daring, and resolute workmen. How many there were thus banded (as it was no doubt justly stated on oath), was never known publicly. It was believed the number was small of those actually engaged in the work of destruction, and that most of them were young. If so, they compensated by an activity almost ubiquitous for their want of numerical force.

But this would partly account for their unexampled secrecy, and the fact, that for years scarcely any were brought to justice. Samuel Slater, a frame-smith, was said to be a principal leader, if not general Ned Ludd himself — so designated from the act of one Ludd or Ludlam, a Leicestershire lad, who, when desired by his father, a stocking-maker, "to square his needles," i.e. to place them in a perfectly straight line in the front of his machine, took his hammer and beat them into heaps. There were said to have been four companies or gangs, one each for the districts of Sutton Ashfield, Nottingham, Arnold, and Swanwick. Frames

were sometimes demolished the same night at places twelve miles apart. They made their attacks in parties of from six to fifty, and seem to have implicitly obeyed the command of their leaders. Those on guard were armed with swords, pistols, guns, and other weapons; the actual frame breakers carried sledge hammers, axes, &c. After the work of destruction was done, the captain called them over by numbers, to which they answered, and on his firing a pistol, the men uncovered their faces and dispersed.

An effective military force of about 800 horse and 1000 foot, was concentrated chiefly in and near Nottingham, under the direction of several experienced military officers who had orders to consult with the local magistrates and two London police magistrates, specially sent down by government, to assist in every way practicable. Money was secretly offered for information; and a royal proclamation was issued offering £50 reward for the apprehension of any offender. Notwithstanding all these measures, the devastation increased in extent and violence as the winter came on, and many country frames were brought into Nottingham for safety.

In November, 1811, one Hollings worth's frames were broken at Bui well, and all the furniture in his house destroyed. On this occasion resistance was offered by discharging loaded fire-arms at the assailants, whereby one of them, John Westby, of Arnold, was mortally wounded. There was great excitement at his funeral; the riot act was read; the high sheriff, magistrates and military being present. The enraged rioters destroyed next day a waggon-load of frames near Arnold, and a few days after thirty-seven frames at Sutton in Ashfield, belonging to one Betts, whose factory they sacked. Soon after he died deranged. Here the Yeomanry Cavalry caught four frame-breakers — Bradbury, Marshall, Green and Clarke — who were committed for trial. Stacks were burnt whose owners were active members of that force. In the following week thirty-six more frames were broken. The magistrates published a letter which states:—

"There is an outrageous spirit of tumult and riot, houses are broken into by armed men, many stocking-frames are destroyed, the lives of opposers are threatened, arms are seized, stacks are fired, and private property destroyed, contributions are levied under the name of charity, but under the real influence of terror."

It goes on to point out —

"That all this tends to insurrection, and that it is their duty to suppress these evils by civil and even military force, and to cause the due execution of laws which will affect the lives of offenders."

This address had no effect in checking the outrages. In the last week in November, forty-five frames, chiefly making cut-ups, were broken at Basford, and others at Nottingham, Chilwell, Cossall, Eastwood, Heanor and Arnold. Upon this, the public-houses were ordered to close at 10 P.M. and inhabitants warned not to be out after that hour. The hosiers and lace manufacturers now felt sufficiently alarmed to hold a general meeting, at which it was resolved, "that if peace were restored they would be prepared to receive and consider proposals from their workpeople and remove grievances if any were found to exist." Twenty more frames were destroyed the following week, and the minds of the people were evidently inflamed by the tenor of the Royal proclamation. Farmhouses were plundered of provisions and money by men who declared "they would not starve while there was plenty in the land." It was in this last week of November, 1811, that the writer of these lines, then a youth of scarcely seventeen, was required by his masters to get into the saddle and make a long round, to convey the information that if their frames, of which they employed about 3000, were spared from the destruction with which they were threatened, one shilling per dozen advance would be paid the following Saturday, and be continued whether others paid it or not. It was a dreary afternoon with heavy rain and winter sleet. He rode hard, and at Basford, Bulwell, Eastwood, Heanor, Ilkiston, Smalley, Sawley, Kegworth, Gotham and Euddington, delivered to their head frame-work-knitters the joyful news of the offered advance. The wintry storm, though uncomfortable enough to the messenger, tended greatly to the success of his message. It prevented for that night the marauding parties employing themselves; these frames had been undoubtedly doomed, for an example, as belonging to one of the most influential houses in the trade. The promise made was faithfully performed; not one of their frames was injured, and no further fears were excited as to the safety of their property. The author served for a whole year (at this time of alarm) as a special constable, and though so young had others, at first civilians and afterwards foot soldiers, to lead every second or third night. In the latter case six men armed with muskets were told off, and at 5 P.M. having received the instructions and pass-word from the sitting magistrate, he did the duty of patrolling with them in the town until six the following morning. The responsibility was new and weighty, and not altogether unattended with danger, the Luddites being armed; and knowing they hazarded their own lives, they were not chary of the lives of others. Their daring and courage were shewn in the instance of one who entered a house alone in Rutland Street, Nottingham, one evening; proceeded up stairs and smashed the material parts of a frame in a minute or two; but that short time was sufficient to cause an alarm; constables were in front of the house, and the author happened to be on duty, in Park Street, behind it. The man at once perceived his danger, threw himself on the roof; passing along others he saw in the dim light that the earth had been lately turned up in a garden below, and leaped from the eaves of a three-story house upon it. The frame-breaker quietly passed through a kitchen where a family were at table, and escaped. In a few minutes the shouts of a sympathising crowd were heard at New Radford, half a-mile from the scene of the adventure. Nineteen warp frames worth £200 were broken at Linby, and fourteen stocking-frames at Ruddington, with twenty at Clifton, in the first fortnight of 1812; also fifteen frames were destroyed at New Radford, nine at Basford, nine at Hucknall, five in Nottingham, and three at Butwell — sixty-eight in all; and the Sunday night following, eight in Nottingham in eight minutes. Wheat was now £5. 8s. per quarter, employment scarce, and there was great suffering. The

town of Nottingham seemed as if in a state of siege. A large subscription was now entered into throughout the county, for the purpose of stimulating endeavours to suppress these outrages. It was headed by the names of the Dukes of Newcastle and Rutland, Earl Manvers and Lord Middleton, with others of £500 each; Messrs. Sherbrooke, Manners Sutton, and many others, £100 each, &c.

At the March assizes in 1812, judge Bailey sentenced four frame breakers to fourteen and three to seven years' transportation — leaving the commission of assize open, that if needful he might return and administer summary justice on any delinquents. At the July assizes, one was sentenced to fourteen years' transportation and another to three years' imprisonment for frame breaking.

In March an act was passed, extending the punishment of death to any one breaking a frame employed in manufacturing any kind of material. In April, Mr. Trentham, a Nottingham hosier, was shot by two men, but not mortally wounded, while standing at his own door. They were never discovered, although £600 was offered for their apprehension. In November this year, Luddism became again prevalent, chiefly on Sunday evenings. Several frames were broken at Snemton; but a bold defence of some others, made by Mr. Black, caused the practice again to cease for a time.

When the government brought in the Bill which made breaking frames punishable with death, Lord Byron strongly opposed it in a debate which took place in the House of Lords, 27th February, 1812. In this, his maiden speech, he forcibly described the condition of things then existing around and in close proximity to his own dwelling, Newstead Abbey. His Lordship said —

"To enter into any detail of the riots would be superfluous, the House is already aware that every outrage short of actual bloodshed has been perpetrated, and that the proprietors of the frames obnoxious to the rioters, and all persons supposed to be connected with them, have been liable to insult and violence. During the short time I recently passed in Nottinghamshire, not twelve hours elapsed without some fresh act of violence; and on the day I left the county I was informed that forty frames had been broken the preceding evening, as usual, without resistance and without detection.

"Such was then the state of that county, and such I believe it to be at this moment. But whilst these outrages must be admitted to exist to an alarming extent, it cannot be denied that they have arisen from circumstances of the most unparalleled distress. The perseverance of these miserable men in these proceedings tends to prove that nothing but absolute want could have driven a large and once honest and industrious body of the people into the commission of excesses so hazardous to themselves, their families, and the community. At the time to which I allude, the town and county were burdened with large detachments of the military, the police were in motion, the magistrates assembled, yet all the movements, civil and military, had led to nothing. Not a single instance had occurred of the apprehension of any real delinquent, actually taken in the fact, against whom there existed legal evidence sufficient for conviction."

During these excesses in Nottinghamshire, though few frames were broken in Leicestershire, yet the spirit of discontent was equally active there, but it shewed itself in a far more rational form. During the disturbances which prevailed, producing great alarm amongst the resident nobility and gentry, as well as all persons of property and others peaceably disposed, Mr. Gardiner relates, in his Music and Friends, vol. I. p. 476, that—

"Being at Wigston Hall, Lord St. John enquired of him their cause; to which he replied, 'a party was going about drawing out and taking away the jack wires from the frames of those working under price.' This act renders a frame useless for the time, but does not injure it; and when restored, the part may be replaced in the frame, by a competent person, in a few minutes time, so that it may be set to work again. Jack wires had been drawn and deposited in the churches at Arnold and elsewhere, before the more decisive step of destroying the frames was adopted."

During the same year, 1811, Gardiner, being in London to oppose as a hosier the proposed bill for legislatively giving powers to fix the fashion and price for making all kinds of frame-work knitted goods thereafter to be made, had an interview with the Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr. Manners Sutton, the representative of an ancient Nottinghamshire family, in the course of which his Grace said, "I am much alarmed at these Luddites, and fear they will produce a commotion if they are not speedily put down." A fear which pervaded for the time the whole kingdom. Gardiner replied :

"It is to be lamented that the operatives entertain very wrong notions about the improvements in machinery; and I am sorry to find well educated persons join them in saying they are injurious to their interests. Genius is not to be stopped in this savage manner. If invention is not allowed to work here, it will be carried abroad and ultimately destroy our trade."

Upon this subject an old and experienced Leicestershire stocking-maker remarked, "Frames were broken in 1811-15, not on account of disputes about wages, but of cut-up work, which lowered the demand for fully wrought goods, and so tended to reduce prices generally."

In October, 1814, the house of Mr. Thomas Garton, at Basford, was attacked. This person had caused the apprehension of a sworn Luddite, James Towle (afterwards hanged at Leicester) and being in expectation of this visit, he had obtained the assistance of several constables who were then with him. Several shots being fired, they fired in return, when Samuel Barnford, one of the assailants, fell. The rest in retreating shot a neighbour, Mr. Kilby, dead at his own door, which he had opened on hearing the report of firearms. Some wide frames making cut-up work were broken in and near Sutton in Ashfield about this time.

A long cessation of Luddism ensued, until, in the night of the 18th of June, 1816, nineteen lace machines were broken in the shops of William Wright and Thomas Mullen. Two men were tried for this offence, and saved by their counsel, Mr. Denman, successfully pleading an alibi. If they had been convicted the judge and jury were to have been shot by armed men, many such being in the court.

Whether the daring character, the extent of property destroyed, or the consequent dreadful results to the culprits, be considered, the attack on the factory of Messrs. Heathcoat, Lacy, and Boden, at Loughborough, which took place in the night of the 28th of June, 1816, was one of the most deplorable of these memorable affairs. Fifty-five frames were destroyed of the value of £8000 or £10,000, and the lace upon them was burnt. But the most serious and fatal part of these proceedings to the prisoners ultimately tried, was the "firing a pistol at John Asher, one of the workmen in the place, with intent to kill him." James Towle, who had been previously tried for frame breaking and acquitted, was found guilty of this attempted murder at the Leicester Assizes in August, 1816. He was executed in presence of an immense multitude, shewing undaunted self-possession, repeating and singing a hymn with seeming fervour.

Daniel Diggle was convicted at Nottingham, in 1817, of shooting George Kerrey, at Radford, in December, 1816, and wounding with intent to kill. He had pleaded guilty, and deplored on the scaffold his association with Luddites, thereby disobeying the commands of his parents.

The same year, at Leicester, eight men, Savidge, Withers, Amos, Watson, Mitchell, Caldwell, Crowder, and Clarke, were arraigned for the attempt on the life of Asher at Heathcoat's factory. John Clarke was tried alone, on account of the challenges exhausting the jury list. On this occasion there was the additional evidence, such as it was, of Blackburn and Burton, two accomplices, given avowedly to save their own lives. It seems from the statement of the first of these, and who appears to have been an active man amongst the managers of the frame breaking conspiracy, that £18 was given Withers, (who probably led the party and was one of the prisoners), with which to buy tools and fire-arms for the rest; £40 more was promised to be paid when the frames were broken, and £60 more to be collected and distributed among the men actually engaged. Savidge was active in the money part of the affair. "The Radford job had not yet been paid for, though promised; and none but old Neds" (men who had been thus employed before) "would do for this expedition," which was felt to be one of hazard, requiring the utmost boldness and experience. Seventeen names were enumerated as forming this picked party. The jury found Clarke guilty; as did another jury the next day the seven others. A woman, whose husband was a workman in the factory, gave evidence, that hearing the noise of frame breaking, she went into the street, and being laid hold of by Savidgo, one of the prisoners, asked him why they broke the frames? He answered, because Heathcoat's men were working under price. On which she replied, the men were satisfied, and they had no business to break the frames. She swore to the identity of seven of the men charged.

Being found guilty, six were hanged and two were transported for life. The former shewed great firmness, addressing the spectators, and all joined in singing a hymn, one repeating it for that purpose. Fifteen thousand spectators witnessed the execution. After this scene Luddism seemed to have become extinct; no frames being broken in these parts for several years. About one thousand stocking-frames and eighty lace machines were destroyed during this outburst of popular frenzy.

The practice extended into the northern counties, it was professed on account of the increase of machines directly calculated to supersede manual labour. In regard to the object had in view by the Nottinghamshire frame breakers, opinions at the time and since have much varied. Probably there were various hopes entertained by the multitudes around, who sympathised undoubtedly with the movement, though they stood aloof from personal efforts to promote it. The broad substratum of the whole of this wretched heap of wrong-doing was undoubtedly the hunger and misery into which the large portion of the fifty thousand frame-work-knitters and their families were fallen, and from which they never fully emerged for the following forty years. During that long interval, the average of the framework-knitters clear earnings by long hours of labour did not exceed six shillings a-week,

It was upon the occasion of the condemnation of the eight men at Leicester, that Gr. Henson and William Robinson took up to London a numerously signed petition for mercy, but before it could be presented, Henson was arrested, examined before the council, and confined seven months in Coldbath fields as a state prisoner, on suspicion of high treason.

Amongst the papers on trade subjects which Grovenor Henson left behind him, is one, which if true — and there seems no reason to doubt it, as to the main facts related — throws considerable light on the question how this bobbin net frame breaking originated and was carried into effect. The paragraph is as follows:

"The patent machines were worked by hand; in a few years wheels were put in to work the carriages by machinery, which improvements doubled the speed, and these machines were called 'Loughborough improved.' But even then, the patentees were pressed by the warp Mechlin nets, and had to reduce wages one-third. Upon this the (Nottingham) warp committee confederated with Lacy's Loughborough hands and the turn-outs; and the resolution was taken, though it was then in the midst of summer, to destroy his machines. This was effected. Heathcoat was obliged to build entirely new machines."

Lacy's hands referred to, were probably point net or warp lace workmen. When Heathcoat's patent traverse net factory was established, the newly sprung up manufacture of warp lace was making rapid strides towards taking the place of the decaying trade in point net, and absorbing the hands, gave a very high rate of wages, therefore these workmen could well afford funds; and to destroy so formidable a rival as the twist net patentee, they would be very likely to find the money. About £120 in all was promised for this business, and another recently performed was yet owing for, shewing that in both trades, hosiery and lace, when it was a question of breaking frames, the work was done for hire. No doubt the committee would select the 'old Neds' most suited for the purpose. The members of these trade societies were at that time and for twenty years after, bound together by secret oaths, and their leaders acted with most despotic power. It is not too much to say, that there was no trade combination in the three midland counties during the first forty years of this century with which — though he might not, and in this instance doubtless did not, take a part — Henson was not acquainted, both as to their leaders and designs, and in due time their operations. Thus, before the first frames were broken in March, 1811, at Arnold, at a conference with Brocksopp and other hosiers, it had been agreed "to give the men ??wwabated wages, provided they would join in bringing up the under paying masters to the same standard and to put down cut-up work." Henson expresses, in his manuscript account, great indignation because the men in this instance would not carry out the plan — which if he did not devise, he strongly approved — but went and broke Brocksopp's frames amongst the first batch at Arnold.

In various conversations twenty to thirty years after, he recounted at some length the fears and hunger and thirst of four of the men amongst the seventeen who made the attack on Heathcoat's factory; who lay concealed, he said, the whole of the following day in the long grass then covering Loughborough meadows, not daring to stir from under the burning sun till night, and then not venturing to cross the bridge over the Soar, or through the toll bar at Cotes, for fear of detection, taking bye-paths along the river by Zouch Mills, there crossing it, and so pursuing their course over Red hill, crossing by the Trent ferry at Barton they took their way along the bank, till they reached Nottingham and their homes. The names of three of these he mentioned, whom he described as having been deeply implicated in most of those acts of violence since 1811; but who on effecting this escape, and the equal danger of being denounced by approvers on the trials of their comrades, separated themselves from all lawless courses ever after, becoming wiser and sadder men. One of them lived until a few years ago, employed as care taker of valuable stock in a warehouse, and was a faithful and trusty servant. He wrote, it is believed, a full account of what he knew of Luddism, to be read after his death. But the paper, if it exists, has not been accessible to the author, through the sudden and lamented decease of the late Alderman John Bradley, of Nottingham.

The name of the fourth frame breaker who escaped, Henson would never reveal, but promised to leave behind him "an historical account of Luddism," of which, if he should die first, the present author might avail himself. Such a document has not been found, which is much to be regretted, as its contents would have been both curious and valuable. So much was gathered from Mr. Henson, notwithstanding the decided repugnance he usually shewed to enter into details on this subject, as to make it quite evident that the executions, which took place in 1816-17, were, in his opinion, the efficient cause of the disappearance of Luddism from the midland counties.

The proprietors of the machinery which had been destroyed at Loughborough, sued the county for the damage, which on an enquiry ordered by the King's Bench, it was decided must be paid to the amount of £10,000. The magistrates required that the sum when handed over should be expended locally. To this Mr. Heathcoat gave a decided refusal, and the amount was never received. He said that "his life had been threatened; and he would go as far off as possible from such desperate men as these frame breakers were." He agreed with Mr. Lacy that their future course as to the erection of new machines should be distinct; and in conjunction with Mr. John Boden, of Loughborough, who had become a partner and the director of the sale of their lace goods in London, a purchase was made of a large mill at Tiverton in Devonshire, where machinery could be driven by the powerful stream of the Exe. This building was restored and enlarged, and the construction of rotary power machines was at once commenced and vigorously carried on until in the end three hundred were at work there. This decision, directly consequent upon the unlawful and deadly violence of a combination of workmen, has already deprived the midland district of the employment and profit derived from six or seven hundred machines, during the fifty years which have since intervened. Comment on such a fact is unnecessary.




https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/The_Cyclop%C3%A6dia_Or_Universal_Dictionary.html?id=qfQfOCasRvcC&redir_esc=y

The Cyclopædia; Or, Universal Dictionary of Arts, sciences, and Literature. By Abraham Rees, ... with the Assistance of Eminent Professional Gentlemen. Illustrated with Numerous Engravings, by the Most Distinguished Artists. In Thirty-nine Volumes. Vol. 1 [- 39], Volume 34


STOCKING-FRAME, a most ingenious machine for weaving or knitting of stockings. To comprehend the action of this machine, which is extremely complicated, it is first necessary to have a perfect idea of the nature of the fabric which is produced by it: this is totally distinct from cloth woven by a loom, as the slightest inspection will shew; for instead of having two distinct systems of threads, like the warp and the weft, which are woven together, by crossing each other at right angles, the whole piece is composed of a single thread, united or looped together in a peculiar manner, which is called stocking-stitch, and sometimes chain-work.

This is best explained by the view in fig. 1. Plate stocking-frame. A single thread is formed into a number of loops or waves, by arranging it over a number of parallel needles, as shewn at R: these are retained or kept in the form of loops or waves, by being drawn or looped through similar loops or waves formed by the thread of the preceding course of the work, s. The fabric thus formed by the union of a number of loops is easily unravelled, because the stability of the whole piece depends upon the ultimate fastening of the first end of the thread; and if this is undone, the loops formed by that end will open, and release the subsequent loops one at a time, until the whole is unravelled, and drawn out into the single thread from which it was made.

In the same manner, if the thread in a stocking piece fails or breaks at any part, or drops a stitch, as it is called, it immediately produces a hole, and the extenfion of the hole can only be prevented by fastening the end. It should be obferved, that there are many different fabrics of stocking-stitch for various kinds of ornamental hosiery, and as each requires a different kind of frame or machine to produce it, we should greatly exceed our limits to enter into a detailed description of them all. That species which we have represented in fig. 1. is the common stocking-stitch used for plain hosiery, and is formed by the machine called the common stocking-frame, which is the ground-work of all the others.

Fig. 2. is a perspective view of a common stocking-frame, exhibiting as many of its parts as can be seen in a general view. The basis is a wooden frame, confifting of four pillars N, and various cross-pieces, called rafters: the two uppermost, M, are called caps: upon the top of these the small parts of the machine are fituated, being sustained in a frame of wrought iron.

The pieces which compose the iron frame are two fole-bars w, which are screwed down upon the wooden caps M, and at the ends have joints, g, to support the preffer-bows G,G, of which we shall foon have occafion to speak. At the back are two vertical standards, V, called the back standards, which support the axis T. These standards are united by back cross-bars, which are clearly seen in the figure near V. There are likewife two front standards W, erected from the fole-bars w, w.

To give motion to this machine, the workman seats himself before it, upon a board or feat A, and puts the different parts of the machine in motion by his hands and feet:
he applies his feet upon two treadles B, C, which have cords, b, c, afcending from them, and passing in oppofite directions round a barrel or wheel, upon the axis of which is a large wheel,D, called the slur-wheel. By alternately pressing down one treadle, and allowing the other to rise, he can turn this wheel round in either direction at pleasure. The object of this movement will be described hereafter. There is likewise a third treadle, E, upon which he presses his foot, when he wishes to bring down what is called the presser-bar, marked F, the use of which will be afterwards explained. This bar is attached to two arms or levers G, which are moveable round the fixed centre pins or joints g. The ends of the levers are of a curved form; hence the pieces Gar

the presser-bows. The connection with the treadle Eis by a string or wire e, which afcends behind the machine, and is attached to the cross-bar H, which is extended from one of the presser-bows to the other, and is cranked down, to avoid fuch parts of the machine as it would otherwise intercept in its motion. The return of the presser and middle treadle, E, is produced by the re-action of the wooden spring I, which draws it up with two strings; but in some frames a counter-weight is used instead of the spring. The weaver produces all the other movements by his hands: for this purpose, he applies them to the ends K, K, of the hand-bar, and he can then very conveniently press his thumbs upon the thumb-plates L, L. By drawing forward or lifting up the hand-bar K, and at the same time preffing upon the thumb-plates L, or relieving them, he gives the requifite motions to what is called the frame of finkers, or fimply the frame, because it contains the principal works of the machine. The thread of which the stocking is to be made is kept upon a bobbin M, stuck upon a pin in the front upright, N, of the frame, and the thread from this is carried upon the needles; and when it is woven into the stocking piece by the action of the needles and finkers, the piece hangs down at s, and is received upon a small roller fixed in an iron framep, called the web, which is made fufficiently heavy to stretch the piece to a moderate tenfion.

As an introduction to a description of the whole machine, it will be proper to give the reader an idea of those parts which operate upon the thread, and of the motions which are given to them to produce the loops or meshes. These parts are the needles, the frame of finkers, and the presser-bar: the needles are stationary, the rest moveable.
Fig. 1. reprefents what are called the needles : these are made of iron-wire, of the shape represented, and are hooked or barbed at the ends, the returned points of the hooks or barbs being made very delicate. There is a small cavity or groove punched or funk in the stem of the needle, immediately beneath the barb, of sufficient depth to receive the point, when an adequate pressure is applied upon the hook to bend the barb down. The barb then becomes a closed eye; and if a thread is looped over the wire or ftem of the needle, and drawn forwards while the barb is thus closed, it will draw over the barb of the needle, and come off at the end of it : but if the thread is drawn forwards whilft the barb is open, it will be caught under the hook, and be thus detained, as shewn at R. This circumstance must be particularly attended to, as the principal action of the machine depends upon it. The depreffion of the barbs of the needles is produced by the edge of the presser-bar F, which is extended horizontally over the whole length of the needles, and actuated by pressing the foot on the middle treadle, as before explained.

Between every two adjacent needles, 1, 1, a thin plate of fteel, 2, 3, is placed : these plates are called finkers ; they are formed to a particular shape (as shewn in fig. 4.),
and are capable of being elevated or depressed, and also of being drawn backwards or forwards between the needles.

These motions are given by the hands of the weaver, as the hand-bar K, which he holds, is part of the frame containing the jacks and finkers. The finker-frame confifts of the hand-bar KK (fig. 2 or4.), extending across it at the bottom; the hanging cheeks O, O, which form the upright fides of the frame; and the upper bar P, which is called the finker-bar, because the finkers are fixed to it, being united several together in pieces of lead each an inch wide, which are cast round the ends of the finkers, and faftened by screws to the bar P.

To allow the frame of finkers to have the motions of which we have spoken, it is suspended byjoints at the top of the hanging-cheeks, called the top joints: these joints are formed at the ends of the top arms, Q, Q, which are two horizontal levers fixed to an axis T, called the spindle-bar: the extremities ofthis turn on pivots, supported by the upper ends of iron uprights V, called the back standards.

By the motion of the spindle-bar upon its centres, the frame of finkers can rife and fall, and the quantity of this motion is limited by stop-fcrews applied to the vertical standards W. To draw the finkers forward between the needles, the finker-frame can be inclined upon the top joints of the hanging-cheeks, by drawing forwards the hand-bar K. From the middle of the spindle-bar, T, a short lever projects, which is borne upwards by a spring, Y, called the main-spring: this is supported by apiece which projects from the fixed cross-bar of the frame, and is of sufficient force to bear the frame of finkers upward, and give the top arms, Q, Q, a tendency to rest always against the upper stop-screws, X, of the standards W. The hooked part or nips f (fig. 4.) of the sinkers, are for the purpose of forming loops in the thread between the needles. To effect this, the nips,f, of the jacks and finkers are raised above the level of the needles, as in fig. 4, and the thread is extended across all the needles, immediately beneath the nips. If then the jacks and finkers are all pressed down between the needles, it is evident that the nips of the finkers must carry the thread down before them, and form it into loops hanging down between each needle, as shewn at X. This, then, is the principal office of the sinkers : but to perform the operation of finking in the manner now described, by depressing the whole number at once, would not be practicable ; because, as a greater length of thread is required when it is depressed into loops, than when it lies straight across the needles, it would require to draw the thread all at once from the bobbin M (fig. 2. ), in sufficient quantity to make up the difference ; todo which, the thread must slide or draw beneath between the nips and the needles, which it could not do, on account of the friction.

The contrivance to render this depression or looping down of the thread between each needle practicable is very ingenious. The row of finkers shewn in fig. 4. is composed of two kinds, called jack-finkers and lead-finkers, which are very different in their movements, although we have hitherto spoken of them as one. The lead-finkers are all
those of which we have spoken as being fastened to one bar P, called the finker-bar, which is part of the finker-frame, and which the workman moves by his hands: on this account, the lead-finkers all move together; they re one half of the whole number, and are disposed between every other needle, so that the space between each lead-finker has two needles in it. The jack-finkers are made of the same form as the lead-finkers, one being placed between each of the two needles contained between every lead-finker; therefore the lead-finkers and jack-finkers are disposed alternately to form a row, and a needle is placed in every space in the whole Each jack-finker is supported by a small lever, hi, (fig. 3.) called a jack, freely movable on a centre-pin: the oppofite end i, or tail of each jack, is pressed by a spring k, which has a notch or indentation at a particular place; and when the jack-finker is elevated, so that its nip, f, is above the level of the needles 1, ready to receive the thread, the end of the tail, i, is received in the notch of the spring k, which retains it in that position; but at the same time a flight force applied beneath the tail, i, of the jack to lift it up will depress the nip,f, of the jack-finker, 3, between the needles.

It is to be understood, that all the jacks, ib, are arranged in a row, and move upon one wire, which is a common centre of motion beginning at one end of the row, and proceeding one by one to the other. To effect this, a straight iron bar, or ruler 1, called the flur-bar, is extended beneath all the jacks, and upon this a piece of metal, m, called the flur, travels, with rollers to reduce the friction: it is drawn by a line extended from each fide, and conducted over a pulley n, at each end of the bar 1, to be carried round the flur-wheel D, fig. 2.

We have before explained how an alternate motion is given to this wheel, by the action of the two feet upon the two treadles B, C: it is plain by this connection, that the flur, m, can be made to travel from one end of the flur-bar, 1, to the other, and in so doing, that it will elevate the tails, i, of all the jacks, i, b, beneath which it paffes, and produce a correfponding depreffion of the jack-finkers, 3, between the needles. After the flur has passed, the jacks retain the position given to them by the pressure of the springs k.

The operation of finking or forming the loops between the needles is thus conducted: the nips of all the finkers are raised above the needles, as in fig. 4; the thread is then extended lightly across the stems of the needles, beneath the nips f. By preffing on one of the treadles, B or C, the flur-wheel D is made to turn round, and this, by the slur-line, draws the flur, m, from one end of the flur-bar, 1, to the other.

In its passage it encounters the tails, i, of the jack, and lifts them up one by one, which at the fame time depresses the corresponding jack-finker 3; and its nip,f, finks the thread between the needles, and forms a loop. As these loops are formed fucceffively, the thread draws easily beneath the nip to produce each fingle loop, and the workman allows the threads to draw off from the bobbin, M, through his fingers, as fast as it is required. When all the jack-finkers are depressed, a loop of the thread will be formed between every other pair of needles. The workman then depresses the lead-finkers, 4, by pulling down the hand-bar K, and their nips carry down the thread between the remaining needles in loops, in the intermediate spaces between the former loops : in doing this, he causes the jack-finkers, 4, to rife up, as much as he depresses the lead-finkers 3 ; because it should have been mentioned before, that the first loops formed by the jack-finkers were double the depth intended, although only half the number: by this means they contained the proper quantity of thread to form the whole number of loops ; viz. one between every two adjacent needles.

The jack-finkers are caused to rise up by means of the locker-bar, p, extending over all their tails i. Each end of this bar is screwed to a lever, g, called a locker, which moves upon the fame centre as the jacks, and the front ends of these levers are made with inclined ends, so as to be lifted up by wedges fixed at the back of the thumb-plates, L, which move on joints fixed to the finker-bar, and hang down in a convenient fituation to be acted upon by the thumbs of each hand, when holding the ends of the hand-bar K. The weaver, therefore, presses back the two thumb-plates L, at the fame time that he depresses the hand-bar, K, of the frame containing the lead-finkers ; by which means he produces the afcent of the jack-finkers, in an equal degree to the defcent of the lead-finkers, until the nips of the two arrange exactly in one line, which pofition is determined by proper ftops attached to the finker-frame. By this means, a complete row ofl oops is formed, one loop between each needle.

These loops are now to be carried backwards upon the needles, into the position of s, fig. 1 , so as to occupy the arch or opening, s, of the finkers, which open part is made purposely to admit the loops last made to remain upon the stems of the needles, quite detached from the action of the finkers, which are at liberty to form a new course of loops by the nips, f, of their points t.

If we suppose the frame has been before at work, the loops last formed, which hang upon the stems of the needles, will not be a single thread, but the loops at the upper part of the work s, fig. 1: it is only when the frame first begins to work that the loops will be a detached thread, as we have juft described.

But it remains to shew how the loops are put back upon the needles: this is done by merely lifting up the hand-bar K, till the points, t, of the finkers rife above the needles : the hand-bar is then drawn forwards a little, to advance the finkers so much, that the points t, which were behind the loops of thread upon the needles, will now come before them, and then the hands are depressed, to infert the points, t, between the needles again before the threads; and by pushing back the hand-bar, the points, t, carry back the work upon the stems of the needles, so that it will be fituated in the arch, or opening, s, of the tinkers.

When the finkers advance or recede, they must all move together both the lead-finkers and jack-finkers, as if they were one. It is clear that there is no impediment to the
moving forwards of the lead-finkers, because they are at liberty to incline or swing forwards upon the joints at the tops of the hanging-cheeks, O, O, which suspend the frame containing them : but for the jack-finkers to advance at the fame time, it is necessary to bring forward the jacks, and their centre of motion, together with the springs and flur-bar. To admit of this motion, all those parts are framed upon a strong bar called the camel ; and upon this is placed four wheels, which run upon the fole-bars, so as to become a carriage. To communicate motion to this carriage, a link is jointed to a piece at each end, marked r,fig. 2or 4, which is screwed to the finker-bar P, just within the thumb-plates L. These links are jointed at the other ends to the common centre of motion of the jacks. The joints of the pieces, r, are so adjusted, that they will exactly line with the joints which unite the jacks and jack-finkers together ;
and the links are the fame length between the centres as the jacks, for which reason they are called half-jacks.

By means of this connection, the carriage, with all its appendages, viz. the jacks, with their springs and the flur-bar, are drawn forwards at the same time that the finker-frame is drawn forwards, by pulling the hand-bar KK; or, by a contrary movement, the loops of threads which were last formed upon the needles, will be carried back from the hooks or beards of the needles upon their stems, as shewn at s,fig. 1 , so as to be in the arch, s, of the finkers, as before described.

The first row of loops being thus disposed of, the frame of finkers is restored to its former position, and a second row is formed upon the stems of the needles by a repetition of the same process, viz. extending the thread across the needles beneath the nips, f, of the finkers ; moving the slur by the two outside treadles B, C, which depresses all the jack-finkers, and makes a loop of double depth between every other pair of needles : this is called drawing the jacks : next preffing on the thumb-plates L, and depreffing the hand-bar, K, at the same time, which elevates the jack-finkers, and depresses the lead-finkers by one movement, and produces a loop of thread between every two adjacent needles. Another complete row of loops is now formed upon the stems of the needles ; and this row is to be brought forwards, fo as to be under the beards or hooks of the needles, in the manner shewn by R, pg. 1. This is produced by fimply drawing forwards the hand-bar, K,

which advances all the finkers together, and their points, t, push forwards the thread till it comes into the beards, and these prevent it from coming off the needles.

The next operation is lifting up the hand-bar and frame of finkers as much as will raise their points, t, quite clear up above the needles between which they were situated, and applying the foot on the upper treadle E, to bring down the preffing-bar, F, upon the beards of the needles, to close them up, and while fo closed, they hold the loops of thread at R, as if they were looped through the eyes of as many needles. The upper loops of the works which are at s, fig. 1, upon the stems of the needles, in the arch, s, of the finkers, are next brought forward upon the needles, by drawing forwards the frame of finkers; but in advancing these loops, draw over the closed beards of the needles, and confequently over the last-formed hoops, which remain under the beards, in the position shewn at R, fig. 1 ; or, in other words, the loops last formed, and resting under the beards atR,fig. 1, are drawn through the loops of the upper or laft course of the finished work which remained upon the stems of the needles, as represented at s. By this means, the loops of what was the upper or last course of the finished work, become secured from opening or unravelling, and the loops under the beards now become the last or upper course of the work, and are preserved from unravelling by the needles, one of which passes through each loop ; and these loops will not be drawn off from the needles until there is another row of loops prepared, and referved under the beards of the needles, ready to be drawn through them.

When the piece of work is finished, and taken off from the frame, the laft made row of loops must be fecured by running a thread through them, or other means, or they would draw through the preceding loops, and release them, which in like manner would release their predeceffors, and so the whole piece would unravel.

The motion of the frame of finkers, which produces the advance of the finkers towards the points of the needles, or their receffion towards the stem, takes place upon the centres, called the top joints 00, and the wheels of the carriage, as before mentioned. The quantity of motion is limited by a piece,fig. 7, called the arch, which is fixed faft against the infide of the wood-frame N,fig. 2: a part of the hanging-cheeks 0,0, of the frame of finkers defcends with a projecting part to act round this arch, which, at the fame time that it limits the quantity of motion,prevents the motion being made, except in a proper fucceffion, to produce the effects before described.

Thus, when the hook is beneath the arch, the points, t, of the finkers will be beneath the level of the needles, and then the frame of finkers cannot be raised up without first moving the lower part of the frame either forwards or backwards.

In the same manner, when the hook is above the arch, the finkers cannot be depressed till they are moved. When the thread is first extended across the needles, in order to be sunk into loops, the frame is faid to be over the arch, that is, the hook is at the back, or on the farther fide of the arch, and by applying thereto,the finkers are guided in their sinking, that is, when they defcend, they depress the thread to form the loop. When this finking has taken place, the finker-frame will be at its lowest position, and the top arms, Q, will reft upon the lower ftop-fcrew of the standards W. When the finkers are brought forwards, to draw the loops from the ftems of the needles into their beards or points, the hook of the frame moves along the under fide of the arch, and this prevents the points lifting up, while the lower stop prevents them from finking down: but when the finkers are brought fufficiently forwards, the frame is lifted or thrown up by the main-spring, the hook following the curvature of the arch, until the points are completely above the needles, or the frame has reached the upper stop. The finkers are then brought forwards upon their centre of motion, while the presser is drawn down to close the beards of the needles and draw the loops over them; in doing which, the hook quits the arch, and the frame comes forwards without any guide, the same being unneceffary, because the elevation of the finkers is determined by the upper ftop, against which the frame rises by the action of its main-spring; and the proper degree for the advance of the finkers is determined by the drawing forwards of the frame with fufficient force to draw the loops of the work tight : this force the workman must regulate by habit, so as make his work close.

In returning the frame of finkers, in order to put back the work upon the stems of the needles, so as to be out of the way while a new row of loops is made, the hook, 9, muft be carried back beneath the arch, which will keep down the points of the finkers, fo as to prevent them from rifing above the needles, as they would then quit the work they are intended to drive back upon the needles.

By the operation which we have described, one course of the work is formed; but, to render it more clear, we will continue the description, in a few words, of the working of another course. Preparatory to working it, the loops of the last course of the work, and by which the work is fufpended from the needles, must be pushed back upon the stems of the needles to the pofition s, fig. 1, so as to come into the arched or open parts, fig. 4, of the finkers: this is done by depressing the finkers low enough for their point, t, to enter between the needles, and then pushing back the hand-bar and frame of the finkers to carry back the work upon the stems of the needles. This is the fituation in which we fuppofe the frame, when the operation commences ; and the frame is over the arch.

The first movement is the gathering of thread. The thread laid over is lightly extended across the needles, beneath the nips,f, of the finkers ; and by preffing the flur-treadle BC, the jack-finkers are depressed one by one, so as to form double loops. This is called drawing the jacks.

The second movement is sinking. This is done by drawing down the hand-bar K, and bearing upon the thumb-plates, L, at the fame time : the whole row of lead-finkers is thus depreffed, whilft the jack-finkers rise, and the thread is carried down into a loop between every two needles.

The third movement is to bring the frame forwards under the arch. This is done by drawing the hand-bar forwards, and the row of loops just made is brought under the beards of the needles.

The fourth movement is to bring the work forwards from the stem of the needles. To do this, the finker-frame is lifted, up, by elevating the hand-bar K, fo that the point, t, of the finkers will be quite drawn out above the needles; and in this fituation, the hand-bar and finker-frame being brought forwards, the breast or curved part of the arch, s, of the finker will bring forwards the piece of work which hangs upon the stems of the needles, by its loops last made.

The fifth movement is clofing the work, or drawing the loops last made, through the finished loops of the work.

The preffer-treadle E, being borne upon at the fame moment, will bring down the preffer, and it will bear upon the beards, and close them, while the loops are drawn forwards; consequently the loops of the old work will be drawn over the beards, and quite off from the needles: this draws the loops thereof over the loops last made, which remain in the beards of the needles. To draw the work tight, the hand-bar, K, is drawn forwards two or three times with a flight jerk, so as to extend all the loops to their fulleft quantity, and make the loops of the work unite closely.

The course is now finished ; but as a preparation for making another course, the work must be carried back upon the stems of the needles into the situation of s, fig. 1. This is the fixth and last movement. To put back work, the frame is pulled down to bring the points of the finkers below the level of the needles; and in this pofition, by preffing back the hand-bar, and all the finkers together, the points, t, will enter between the ends of the needles, and carry back the loops of the work upon the stems of the needles, where it will remain in the arches of the finkers, so as to be detached from them, and out of the way, while a new fet of loops is formed by the nips of the points of the sinkers; and then the loops of the old work are to be drawn over those last made.
The movements are then repeated: Ist, gathering the thread upon the needles, and depressing it into large loops between every two needles, by the motion of the slur; 2d, finking, to make the loops between all the needles; 3d, bringing the thread under the beards of the needles; 4th, bringing the work forwards from the stems of the needles towards the beards; 5th, closing the beards by the pressure of the presser-bar, and drawing the work over the beards; and, 6th, putting the work back on the needles,
ready for working another course.

The operation of the machine proceeds in the manner described; and as fast as the courses are completed, the work descends lower, and hangs down in a web from the needles. When the piece is of a confiderable length, it is rolled upon a roller, in an iron frame p, called the web, and the weight of the frame is sufficient to keep the piece to a proper tenfion. The roller in the web can be turned round occafionally to wind up the piece, and is retained by a ratchet-wheel and click.

Having given an idea of the manner of the operation of this curious machine, it only remains to explain the adjustments with which it is provided, in order to make it work correctly.

The fineness of the work depends on the number of loops which the thread will make in any given length, and this will be equal to the number of needles and finkers in the same space. The number of needles in an inch is called the gauge of the frame, and they vary from 15 to 40, which latter are used for the finest stockings. The gauge of a frame cannot be altered when it is once made, and the work which it will produce must always be of the fame degree of fineness, although it may be made a little more dense or more flight by drawing the loops very close, or by allowing a greater quantity of thread, and making the loops longer. This circumstance will evidently depend upon the depth to which the nips of the finkers descend between the needles, when they carry down the thread into loops.

To regulate this depth,the needle-bar, or that piece which fuftains the leads containing the row of needles, is made to rife or fall a flight quantity, by means of two long adjusting screws, the heads of which are made with notches, and springs fall into them to keep the screws from turning back: these heads are called the star, and the notches nicks:one is marked 9, in figs. 2 and 3.

The motion allowed to the frame of finkers is limited, as before-mentioned, by stops projecting from the two upright standards, W; and through these stops, stop-screws, x,
are fitted, to regulate the degree of afcent and defcent.

The main-spring, y, is made of fufficient strength to lift the weight of the frame of finkers, and make them always rise up as high as the upper stop-screws will permit.
The manner of making different parts of the stocking-frame is worthy of notice. The needles are made of iron-wire, of a proper degree of fineness: it must be of good quality, as that which is liable to split or splinter, either in filing, punching, or bending, is totally unfit for the purpose. The wire is cut to lengths, and annealed or foftened in a box of charcoal, in which they are heated to redness, and suffered to cool gradually. The needles are next punched with the small cavity which is necessary to receive the point of the beard: this is done by a simple screw-press. The point of the needle is next formed by the file and burnisher, and the hooks are then bent to form the barb : next the needles are flattened, each with a blow of the hammer. Το faften these needles together, and fix them in the machine, they are placed parallel to each other in a mould or frame, and tin or pewter poured into the mould, round the flattened ends of the stems. The piece of lead or pewter is just an inch in width, and the number of needles which it will contain, gives the denomination to the gauge of the frame.
These leads of needles are fastened to the needle-bar by a screw through each. The lead-finkers are made of steel-plates, which are put together by cafting lead round them at the upper ends, in the fame manner as the needles. The rack or piece, which contains the centre of thejacks, is called the comb, because it is composed of a number of small plates, fixed into a bar by casting them with lead or tin.

The ftocking-frame has undergone very few alterations fince its first invention, a circumstance highly creditable to the genius of the inventor. A stocking-frame for weaving the tartan plaid hose which is worn in scotland, is described in the society of Arts Transactions, vol. xxix. p. 84 : it contains fome additions invented by Mr. John Robertson.
