# History of the Woollen Trade


https://archive.org/details/acomprehensiveh01biscgoog/page/400/mode/2up
Comprehensive history of the woolen and worsted manufactures and the natural and commercial history of sheep ..
by Bischoff, James, Volume I

Publication date 1842

pp.490-

Chapter X

Notwithstanding the extensive improvement introduced in manufactures, it was extremely difficult to bring them into operation, from the fears and excitement which prevailed amongst the labouring classes; for a system was pursued in Nottinghamshire, in the years 1810 and 1811, to destroy frames used in the manufacture of lace; and the spirit which there had its rise, extended to the larger manufacturing districts, and the destruction of all machinery, which, as they thought, interfered with hand labour, was contemplated.

Riots commenced in the West Riding of Yorkshire in the year 1812, the chief object being the destruction of gig mills used for raising the wool on blankets, coatings, baize, and on cloth in the process of finishing. The men were regularly organised and trained. After demolishing the works of Mr. Foster, of Horbury, in Yorkshire, their leader ordered them into a field, and their numbers (each man having a number to conceal his name) being called over, he dismissed them by the word of command, — "the work is done, disperse!" The time occupied in the business of mustering, destruction, and dispersing did not exceed twenty minutes. They had the appellation of Luddites. Detachments were sent round the country, who searched the houses for arms, and their depredations were not checked, till a most respectable manufacturer at Huddersfield, Mr. Horsfall, was shot near his own house. A reward of £2,000 was offered for the detection of the murderers, one of whom turned king's evidence, and three were tried and convicted by a special commission, in January, 1813, and were executed at York; and fourteen, who were severally convicted of participating in an attack on Mr. Cartwright'a mill, and other mills, were all executed on one day; and however revolting the destruction of so many lives is to the feelings, it was considered absolutely necessary in order to stop the ravages which were daily committed. It put an end to those disorders, and at the assizes which took place at York, in the April following, Mr. Parke, king's counsel, publicly declared, that however sanguinary it had appeared, in the execution of so many deluded wretches, leaving twelve widows and fifty-seven orphan children, Luddism was then extinct, and government declined to prosecute the other prisoners, having been only determined to restore tranquillity and good order.

Though the exertions made by public men, and by the leading agriculturists of the kingdom, to introduce the spanish merino sheep had been so great, they found it impossible to produce that quality of wool which was required by the manufacturers of superfine cloth; and when they brought their wool to market, meeting the competition of spanish wool, and of saxony wool, the fineness of which now became known, they were greatly disappointed at the prices they were able to obtain, attributing them to what they considered the prejudices of the manufacturers, and they pressed upon Government their grand specific for all distresses, taxation on foreign wool, as their only protection against the evils of which they complained. The agriculturists of England were, however, divided into two parties, — those whose possessions were on the light soils, the downs and the heaths, with fine herbage, and those whose property consisted of rich, loamy, clay, and fen lands. The former were disappointed in the improvement they anticipated in their fleeces from the introduction of the merino sheep; and at their head were Lord somerville, the Earl of sheffield, sir John sinclair, Mr. Western, Mr. Burrell, Mr. Holme sumner, &c. &c.; while those who encouraged the




https://archive.org/details/cyclopaediaorun38rees/page/658/mode/1up?q=%22prepared+for+the+weaver%22
The cyclopaedia; or, Universal dictionary of arts, sciences, and literature
by Rees, Abraham, 1743-1825

Publication date 1819

page/658-

*Woollen Manufacture, Process of.* In an early part of this work, under the article CLOTH, we have given a general view of the process of cloth-making, furnished by a principal manufacturer in the west of England. In the present article, we shall confine our account chiefly to those improvements in the processes which have since been introduced, and shall add a description of the machines which were only slightly noticed in the article *Cloth*, and give references to the plates. The processes of the woollen manufacture may be classed under two heads; those by which wool is prepared for the weaver, and those by which the cloth is finished after it is taken out of the loom. The sorting of wool has already been referred to under the article *Wool*. English wool is supposed to be sufficiently cleaned from pitch marks or other extraneous substances by the wool-sorter, and left by him in a proper state to commence the process of cloth-making. spanish wool in the bale has generally some part of the pitch employed to mark the sheep still adhering to it, which must be carefully cut off. It was till recently the practice to beat the wool with rods, in order to shake out the dust and open the staples; but this is now principally done by an opening machine with long coarse teeth, called a devil, or wool-mill. spanish wool is frequently so hardly pressed together in the bag, that it requires to be opened out by beating, to prepare it for the further processes.

In the west of England, wool is generally scoured before it is dyed or carded; but in Yorkshire this is seldom practised on wool intended for white cloths, and among the smaller, manufacturers who dye their own wool, it is frequently put into the dyeing-vat unscoured; a practice which injures the brightness of the colours, but which enables the manufacturer to make a greater weight of cloth with the same quantity of wool. There is also some saving of labour and expence; but this is more than counter-balanced by the increased quantity of oil per pack required for unscoured wool, which is at least one-third more than would be necessary if the wool were scoured. In the west of England, where the wool is scoured previously to its manufacture, the process is carried on with a degree of neatness and cleanliness, which form a perfect contrast with the horrid stench and disgusting filthiness of the woollen factories in Yorkshire. For fine cloths, olive-oil, called Gallipoli, from the part where it was supposed to be sent, is principally used; and for the coarser cloths rape-oil. Where attention to colour is not required in very coarse goode, fish-oil is sometimes employed; but if the latter remain in the wool or cloth, it turns it brown, undergoing a degree of fermentation injurious to the cloth, and which sometimes occasions spontaneous combustion. To lessen the expence of oil for coarse cloths, some manufacturers in Yorkshire make use of a mixture of soap and water with oil, which answers very well in moist weather, if the wool be immediately carded and spun; but if it remain some time unwashed, or the weather be very hot, the mixture evaporates. It has been attempted to work wool without any oil whatever, but without success. The use of oil is to cover the surface of the fibres, and enable them to slide easily over each other in carding or spinning. What we have before said of the structure of the surface of wool or hair, under the article *Wool*, will suffice to shew the advantage that must result from oiling. The wool is sprinkled with oil as evenly as possible. In Yorkshire the proportion on fine wool is about six gallons per pack, and this is more equally distributed over it by the wool-mill, through which it passes previous to the process called scribbling. This process is a kind of coarse carding, and is performed on a machine similar to that used for scribbling cotton, but larger, and with coarser cards, the principle being similar to that of the carding-machine, hereafter to be described. By this engine the longer fibres are broken down, and they are all laid straight and nearly parallel to each other. The wool leaves the roller of the scribbling-mill in one thin undivided sheet, and the more clear, even, and transparent it appears when held between the eye and the light, the more perfectly has the operation been performed. On the carding-engine, the operation is repeated on finer cards; but instead of leaving the machine in one continued sheet, it is finally divided into separate portions, which by a fluted roller are formed into separate round pieces about one inch in diameter, and two feet three inches in length. The fibres are now arranged so as more easily to slide over and twist round each other in the next process, which is a kind of coarse spinning called slubbing, performed with the slubbing-machine, which will be described. On this machine each of the rolls from the carding-machine are joined together, and drawn out into a loosely-twisted thread, and wound round a spindle, forming what is technically called a *slubbing*. These slubbings being taken to the spinning jenny, which will also be described, are twisted in an opposite direction, and drawn out into threads of yarn of the requisite length. For very fine yarn used in shawls, a machine called the mule is sometimes employed, nearly similar to the cotton mule (see *Manufacture of Cotton*), the slubbing passing through rollers which assist in drawing out the thread smaller and more regular. The yarn is now prepared for winding, sizing, warping, and weaving. (see *Cloth*.) since the article *CLOTH* was written, broad-cloth is almost universally woven by one person only in a loom, making use of the fly-shuttle. (see *Weaving*.) The next process is scouring and burling, already described under the articles *CLOTH* and *Fulling*. The cloth is then sent to the fulling-mill; the finer kinds are prepared for fulling by a mixture of soap and water; in sparse kinds, fuller's-earth supplies the place of soap. (see *Fulling-Mill*, and a farther description at the end of the article.) The principle on which the felting depends has been described under the article *Wool*. By the process of fulling, the cloth becomes shortened in length and breadth, and the fibres are incorporated and intimately united with each other. In the best manufactured cloths, this incorporation is so complete, that the separate threads can scarcely be distinguished, the bottom of the cloth appearing to form one even continuous substance. An improvement in this respect has recently been made at Leeds, by spinning the wool much softer and thicker than has usually been the practice, and uniting the threads in the fulling-mill, and then working the substance of the cloth down to a requisite degree of thinness by the gig-mill, hereafter to be described. At the end of the process, the face or surface of the cloth is much softer, and greatly superior in appearance to cloth manufactured in the common process. A pack of wool of 240 lbs. will make when milled about one hundred and twenty yards of mixed or coloured cloth from fifty to sixty inches in breadth, according to the quality and fineness of the wool. The process of raising, shearing, and pressing, have been mentioned under the article *Cloth*, and will be more fully described when an account is given of the gig-mill and shearing-machine. The object of these processes is to cover the thread with a soft pile, consisting of the fibres of the wool, cut down to an even surface over the whole piece.

There are various kinds of woollen goods worked on the same principle as cloth, and made with both the warp and the weft of carded wool, but which being unmilled, or finished in a different manner, receive different names.

....

From the most remote period of the woollen manufacture until the latter end of the last century, or about the year 1780, very few, if any, mechanical improvements had been introduced into it. During the whole time the various processes were carried on nearly in the same manner, but with greater or less skill, and were employed upon materials more or less valuable. The carding and spinning of wool, and the weaving and finishing of cloth, in the early part of the reign of George III,, were effected by the same machines as in the time of Edward III., which probably were similar to those of the ancient Romans, but more rude in their construction. In an art which had seen so many centuries roll on without any change, it did not appear possible to the manufacturer that any improvement could be effected; and had not the genius of Hargreaves and Arkwright changed entirely the modes of carding and spinning cotton, the woollen manufacture would probably have remained at this day what it was in the earliest ages of civilized society. That it would have been better for general society if it had so remained we readily admit; but after the improved modes of working cotton were discovered, this was impossible. The spinning jenny, which was the same as that employed in the cotton manufacture, but somewhat larger, was introduced into Yorkshire from Lancashire about the year 1780, but did not become general till about three years afterwards. In the first jennies, not more than eighteen or twenty threads could be spun, and the mode of winding the thread upon the spindle was very imperfect. The carding was still effected by the hand, and the slubbing or roving was prepared on the common spinning-wheel. For some time considerable difficulty was experienced in carding by machinery, particularly in clearing the wool from the card; and a slight change in the construction of the machine was found necessary to prepare the wool for the slubbing-billy, of which an account will be given in the description of the carding-machine. soon after this, the carding and spinning of wool and yarn by machinery became general through the manufacturing districts of the West Riding of Yorkshire, and large mills were erected, in which the carding and scribbling machines were turned by a water-wheel, and the roving or slubbing performed on the billy. The wool carded at these mills was sent to the smaller manufacturers in the state of slubbing, and the farther process of spinning was effected on jennies in their own premises. Before the year 1787, the old processes of carding by the hand, and spinning on the wheel, were entirely discontinued in Yorkshire; but it was some years after before the new processes were generally introduced in the west of England, and thus, as we have before stated, the woollen trade became more concentrated in Yorkshire, where cloths could be manufactured at less expence. About this time, machinery began to be applied to the combing and spinning of long combing-wool, to make worsted yarn. see *Worsted spinning*.

In consequence of the great increase of trade in Yorkshire, it was found difficult to obtain situations for mills to be turned by water, and the application of the steam-engine to woollen machinery became very general. The abundance of fuel was highly advantageous to the Yorkshire manufacturer; and it was found to be equally cheap to work the machines by steam as by water, where any considerable rent was paid for the water. The motion of the improved steam-engine was also rendered as regular as a water-wheel, and the great inconvenience and loss from the interruption of the works by frosts or continued droughts were thereby avoided.

The smaller manufacturers in Yorkshire were at first benefited by the introduction of machinery, but in a little time large capitalists began to engage in the woollen trade, and performing all the processes with their own machinery, they were enabled to work cheaper and undersell the smaller makers. The facility also with which wool could now be worked up kept the markets always well stocked with goods, and prevented the manufacturers from taking the advantage of a temporary scarcity or a brisk demand, which they had formerly done, an overstocked market always reducing the profits. soon after the year 1800, the number of small manufacturers began rapidly to decrease many of them, being ruined by the change which had taken place, and compelled to become workmen in the factories of the large capitalists.

The gig-mill and the shearing-machine were not introduced into Yorkshire until they had been several years employed in the west of England, owing to the resistance made to them by the working cloth-dressers or croppers in the north.

The manufacture of worsted is properly a branch of the woollen manufacture, and noticed as such in our history of its progress in England; yet the mode of manufacture, both in preparing the worsted yarn and finishing the goods, being

...

*Description of the Machines employed in the Woollen Manufacture.*—The wool-mill, or willy, is the first machine which is employed on the raw wool to open and disentangle the close matting, in which the wool comes from the wool-stapler. It is also used for clearing the dyed wool from the dye stuff, and again for mixing different parcels of wool together; also for incorporating the oil with the wool.

The wool-mill used in Yorkshire consists of a cylindrical drum, about three feet long and two feet and a half diameter, which is made to revolve near three hundred times per minute. Its circumference is furnished with teeth or spikes, and immediately above it five small rollers are placed, which are also furnished with similar teeth.

...

*scribbling-Machine.*—This is the first stage of carding. The operation tends to disentangle the fibres which were before closely entangled, and draw them out separately, so as to render the wool light and flaky. The scribbling-machine is very similar to the carding-machine, having a large cylinder or drum, which is covered on the surface with sheets of leather stuck full of projecting wire-teeth, called card-wires. The teeth are so close together as to cover the whole surface of the cylinder, like the bristles of a brush. This cylinder is turned rapidly round by the machinery, and the wool is regularly and slowly supplied by feeding machinery to its teeth, which take it up, and the cylinder, as it were, clothes itself with wool.

...

*slubbing-Machine, or Billy.*—This performs the first process of spinning. It reduces the cardings, and draws them out in length; joins them together, and gives them a slight twist, in order to form a coarse and loose thread, called a slubbing or roving, which must be spun over again in the jenny, to make a thread fine enough for the loom.

This operation was formerly performed by hand on the common hand spinning-wheel, which is similar to that used for spinning wool, but of a smaller size. Machines were then contrived by which a number of slubbings could be drawn out together; but the aid of the hands was required for joining the rolls or cardings of wool together in succession, and for other purposes, which were found to take so much time, that very little, if any, saving of labour was effected by the use of such machines.

...

*spinning Jenny.*—In this machine, the slubbings are spun over again, and reduced to the requisite fineness for weaving. The jenny has nearly the same parts as the billy, but differently arranged. The spindles are placed at one end of the frame, and the clasp which holds the slubbings is placed on the carriage, so that it can be moved backwards and forwards, to and from the spindles by the spinner, in order to draw out and extend the yarn at the same time it is twisted.

...

The *Mule for spinning of Yarn* is very nearly the same machine as the mule for spinning cotton; this is used for spinning some kinds of woollen yarn instead of the jenny. When the mule is employed for spinning yarn for weft, it is used in the same manner as described in our article *Cotton Manufacture*; but for spinning warp, the spindles are made to revolve, and twist the thread some time after the carriage is run completely out, and the stretching of the yarn is finished. There is a movement in the machine that shifts the endless strap which turns the mule upon a larger pulley, as soon as the carriage is run fully out, so as to give a more rapid motion to the spindles after the stretching, or drawing out, is finished, than they had during the drawing back of the carriage. By this means some time is saved, because the spindles may be allowed to run very quick when it is only required to twist the threads; but whilst the extension is going on, the twisting motion must be moderate, or the threads would be broken. A very similar movement is used in the mule for spinning cotton, and is called the double-speed; but the description of this mechanism is omitted in the article *MANUFACTURE*.

The mule has not, till lately, been in much repute for spinning woollen yarn, and the jenny is still thought to spin better yarn; but we have no doubt that when certain modifications are made, it will become a much more perfect method than the jenny, being much less dependent on the discretion and dexterity of the spinner; for if the machine is once constructed so as to spin properly, it will always continue to do so.

...

*Burling.*—The cloth being dried is burled, that is examined minutely in every part, and all knots and uneven threads or straws, or extraneous matters, removed; any rents or defects which can be found are repaired, by introducing fresh threads. This being done before the milling or felting, the fibres of the new threads will become so entangled - . render such defects nearly imperceptible in the finished cloth.

*scouring*.—The piece of cloth must be cleansed from the greasiness of the oil before it can be felted; for this purpose, it is first soaked three hours in a mixture of urine and pig’s dung, it is then scoured in the mill for two hours, and lastly, for half an hour with fair water. The scouring is performed at the fulling-mill by a pair of stocks.

*Fulling-Mill for felting the Cloth.*—There is another kind of stocks in a fulling-mill; but the shape of the trough in which the stocks or hammers work on the cloth is different from that described in the article Fulling-Mill, which is only proper for scouring. In order to subject the cloth to the blows of the hammers, the trough for milling ts formed in such a manner that the cloth cannot escape from them, because that part of the trough which is opposed to the beaks of the hammers is nearly a flat surface, and perpendicular to the direction in which the hammers strike, so that the cloth is actually beaten between the beaks of the hammers and the flat bottom or rather fide of the trough.

The hammers are made to strike very heavy blows; but they do not bruise or injure the cloth, because there is always a great number of folds of cloth on which they strike. The helves or handles of the hammers are placed in a different position from the scouring-stocks, in order to make the hammer-heads fall in a more perpendicular direction when they make their stroke, and hence they strike with more force. On this account they are called falling-stocks whilst those used for scouring are called hanging-stocks, in which the helves of the hammers being nearer to the perpendicular, the heads move in a more horizontal direction in the manner of a pendulum, and exert less force on the cloth; the other difference is, that the hammers of the scouring-stocks only drive the heap of cloth round in the trough there being no part directly opposed to the beaks of the hammers but a fair curve, which is so much inclined to the direction in which the hammers move, that the cloth mounts up the inclined curve when the hammer strikes, and evades the direct force of the blow.

...

*Tentering.*— When the milling is finished, the cloth is stretched again on the tenter. It is usual to extend the piece to forty-two yards in length, but not at all in breadth; indeed only one inch of extension in each yard is allowed by law. The cloth remains in the open air until it is perfectly dry and ready for the succeeding operations of finishing, which are only intended to give it a beautiful surface, for it already possesses all the useful qualities of cloth.

*Dressing the Cloth with Teasels.*—This operation is to raise up the nap or loose fibres on the surface of the cloth, by scratching it over with a species of thistles called teasels, in order to form a wool on the surface, which can be removed by shearing. The teasels are the balls or ears which contain the seed of the plant called *dipsacus fullonum*; the seales which form the ball project on all sides, and are terminated with sharp points, which turn downwards, like hooks, and are very elastic. see *TEAsEL*.

A number of teasels are put into a small frame, which is composed of a handle eight or ten inches long, having a small stick passed through it at one end about eight inches long, which is split into two at each end nearly all its length. There is also another similar stick, which is passed through the handle near the middle of its length; the two split sticks are perpendicular to the stem or handle, and parallel to each other. The space between them is filled with teasels, which are jambed in very fast between them, and also in the clefts of the split sticks, where they are secured by strings extended between the ends of the split sticks, and twisted, until they draw the sticks forcibly together, and bind the teasels very fast. This frame filled with teasels forms a stool, which very much resembles the curry-comb used to clean horses, and is used in a similar manner, to scratch over the whole surface of the cloth, and draw out all loose ends of the fibres of the wool, which are not firmly confined by the entanglement of the felting.

The dressing is performed by two men, who hold the teasel-frame by its handle, and work the cloth, when it is hung up in a vertical position over two rails fixed to the ceiling; when they have worked over as much surface as they can reach, they draw down a fresh portion, which they work in turn, and thus proceed until they have finished the whole piece. The first time the cloth is dressed it is wetted with water; it is worked three times over in the wet state, by strokes in the direction of the length of the piece, and then it is worked again three times in the other direction; by this means all the fibres are raised, and the cloth is prepared for shearing.

In the most improved manufactories, the dressing is performed by the gig or gig-mill. This is a cylinder covered on its surface with teasels; and turned rapidly round whilst the cloth is drawn over it.

The *Gig-mill* is represented in perspective in Plate V. *Woollen Manufacture.* ...

...

*shearing or Cropping the Cloth.*—By the operation of the teasels, the wool is become raised all over the surface of the cloth in a loose fur, which must be removed by shearing before the cloth will be fit for wearing, because the fur would gather dirt and dust, and would wear very unequally.

The shears used for cropping by hand are the same as those used in the common shearing-machine, and are represented at E, E, in Plate III. *Woollen Manufacture*. The clothier's shears consist of two very large flat blades of steel, united together by a stem of steel, which is bent into a circular bow, and is sufficiently flexible to allow one of the blades to be moved upon the other, in order to make them cut. Both blades are ground to sharp and straight edges, which apply one to the other, but the blades are not in parallel planes like scissars, for one of the blades is laid quite flat upon the cloth, and the plane of the other blade will then be inclined to the cloth at about an angle of 45 degrees, as is shewn in Plate III. The cutting-edge of this inclined blade bears upon the surface of the flat blade, and the spring of the bow is so set, as to press the two edges always in contact. The lines of the edges of the two blades are not parallel to each other, but inclined, so that the edge of the upper blade crosses the edge of the lower blade, and bears upon the flat surface of that blade, at the end nearest to the bow, whilst the other end of the edge of the upper blade is removed over the edge of the lower blade, thus leaving an interval between the two edges, when the shears are open, as is plainly shewn in the figure. In this state, the shears being open, if the lower blade is laid flat upon the surface of the cloth, the nap or wool, which is to be removed by the cropping, will stand up above the edge of the lower blade, in the interval between the two edges; then if the blades be forced together, the edge of the upper blade will pass or cross over that of the lower, and cut away all the wool which projects above the edge of the lower blade. The contact of the cutting-edges begins at the end nearest to the bow, and proceeds regularly to the other, because, as before mentioned, the edges are not parallel to each other. The blades open or return to their former position by the elasticity of the bow, but in order to make the cut they are closed by means of a handle or lever 10, which is fitted or lodged on a round part of the stem of the bow, so as to play thereupon as upon a centre of motion. A double cord is made fast to the lever or handle near to this centre, the other end of the cord is fastened to a block of wood, which is screwed to the flat of the lower blade, and rises up to a proper height. By depressing this handle, the shears are closed, and make their cut with the greatest facility, the elasticity of the bow returning the handle.

The manner of cropping with these shears is as follows:— The piece of cloth is laid down in folds upon a plank or low bench placed on the ground, and the end is drawn across a table or bench, which is covered with cloth, and stuffed with horse-hair, like a cushion. The cloth is stretched out flat upon the surface of the table, and is retained by hooks and weights. Two workmen are employed to shear a piece of cloth; they place the lower blades of their shears flat on the surface of the cloth, with the line of the edge in the direction of the length of the piece; one of the shears is laid on the edge or lift of the cloth, and the other exactly in the middle of the breadth of the cloth. The bows and stems of the shears project over the edge of the table, and. the workmen place themselves at that edge. Each man guides the shears with his left-hand, and makes the cut with his right. To hold the shears by, a short staff is lashed to the bow of the shears, and secured by a stay to the lower blade; its direction is nearly parallel to the back edge of the upper blade. The workman puts his arm through the bow as far as the elbow-joint, then lays the fore-arm flat against the staff, which he grasps with the hand; and in this way he has a great command of the shears, leaving the right-hand at liberty to work the handle which closes the shears. This handle is moved backwards and forwards with great rapidity, to make cuts or clips on the cloth, and between every cut the lower blade is moved a small space on the cloth, to cut in a fresh part.

The art of shearing consists in moving the shears with great regularity and parallelism, so that every part of the surface shall be equally cropped. The closeness with which the shears cut is regulated by weights laid upon the flat of the lower blade; these press the blade down into the soft cushion on which the cloth is spread, so that the fur will stand up more above the edge of the blade.

As the two shearers advance in their work, their shears proceed across the breadth of the piece of cloth, and when the man who began in the middle has worked to the list of the cloth, the other who began at the list will have worked to the middle, where the first began; the whole breadth is now shorn, and they remove the shears, and draw the piece of cloth forwards across the table, to obtain a fresh surface te work upon.

For shearing common cloth, it is cut wet the first time, then it is dressed again with teasels, dried on the tenter, and cut again in a dry state three times over.

*shearing-Frame.* —The most common machine used in Yorkshire is only applied to give motion to the same kind of shears as are used for cropping by hand, and is usually called the shearing-frame. At the side of the table or cushion on which the cloth is spread, a long stool is placed, having grooves at the edges to guide the wheels of a carriage, to which the shears are affixed by their bows. There is a carriage for each pair of shears, and they are slowly and gradually moved along the stool, by a cord which winds upon a roller turned by wheel-work; and at the same time, the handles of the shears are continually pulled by a cord connected with a small crank, which turns round very rapidly. The direction of the cuts is the lengthways of the piece of cloth, and the two pair of shears advance across the breadth of the piece until a whole breadth is cut; the machine is then flopped, the shears removed, and the piece of cloth shifted upon the table. These shearing-frames operate very well, but require great care and attention to make the different cuttings join, in order to cut equally over the whole surface.

The machine invented by Mr. Harmar of sheffield was of this description; his first patent was in 1787, and another in 1794. At one period his machines were in general use, but the present shearing-frames, although of the same kind, are very much simplified, and work equally well.

...

In considering the processes of the woollen manufacture, as they were practised forty or fifty years ago, and comparing them with the present practices, we find great changes and improvements, but they are by no means carried to so great an extent as in the cotton manufacture. This is owing in a great degree to the circumstance that the manufacture of woollen cloth was rendered very perfect, as far as the goodness and beauty of the cloth was concerned, long before the improved system was begun; and there were great numbers of experienced and able workmen trained up for each process, who by habit and dexterity performed their work as well as it could be done by machinery. The reduction of labour, or the substitution of ordinary hands for experienced workmen, was in this case all that machinery of the most perfect kind could effect both these were advantages to the public and the manufacturer, but were so directly opposite to the inclination and interest of the able workmen, that we find they have made greater and more effectual opposition to the introduction of improvements in the woollen than in any other of our great manufactures.

At various periods attempts have been made by the workmen to suppress machinery, and many mills have been destroyed. In July 1802, considerable riots took place in Wiltshire and somersetshire, in consequence of an attempt to set up the machines called gig-mills. It was contended that this was the same machine which was prohibited by an ancient statute of Edward VI. The disputes ran so high, that the attention of parliament was called to the subject of the laws then existing for the regulation of the woollen manufacture, and a committee was appointed to investigate the policy of encouraging or regulating machinery. In consequence, all the prohibitions of machinery were suspended. The report of this committee contains the following remarks, some of which are applicable to other manufactures as well as the woollen.

The introduction of the gig-mill and other machines was opposed from an idea that it would throw a considerable number of hands out of work; and it was contended, that it was highly injurious to the quality and texture of the cloth. With respect to the actual effects of the gig-mill and shearing-frame on the cloth, the committee report that decisive evidence has been adduced before them by merchants and manufacturers of the greatest credit and experience, to prove that these machines, especially the gig-mill, when carefully employed, finish the cloth in the most perfect manner, and that manufacturers residing in parts of the country where the gig-mill is not used, frequently send their cloths to a distance to be dressed by it.

It also appeared in evidence, that alarms similar to the present had existed among workmen at the introduction of several of the machines which are now in general use. such alarms have gradually subsided as prejudice died away; and the machines are now fully established, without, as it appears, impairing the comforts or lessening the numbers of workmen. The committee remark with much satisfaction, that in many instances in which it was apprehended that the introduction of particular machines would throw such a number of people out of employment as to occasion great distress, the result has been very different; for besides the occupations which the attendance on such machines has given rise to, a fresh demand for labour to an immense extent has arisen out of the increased sale of the article, in consequence of the cheapness and superior quality of the manufacture.

They approve the system of patents, by which the inventor of any new machine secures to himself the exclusive benefits of his discovery for fourteen years; and only, at the end of that term, they are thrown open to the public; this provides in most cases against the too sudden and general establishment of any invention, by which a number of workmen might at once be thrown out of employment.

They next observe, that if the principles on which the use of these particular machines is objected to were once admitted, it would be impossible to define the limits or to foresee the extent of their applications. If the parliament had acted on such principles fifty years ago, the woollen manufacture could never have attained to near its present extent. The rapid and prodigious increase of late years in all the manufactures and commerce of this country is universally known, as well as the effects of that increase on our revenue and national strength. In considering the immediate causes of that augmentation, it appears to the committee, that it is principally to be ascribed, under the favour of Providence, to the general spirit of enterprize and industry among a free and enlightened people, left to the unrestrained exercise of their talents in the employment of a vast capital, pushing to the utmost the principle of the division of labour, calling in all the resources of scientific research and mechanical ingenuity, and, finally, availing themselves of all the benefits to be derived from visiting foreign countries, not only for forming new and confirming old commercial connections, but for obtaining a personal knowledge of the wants, the taste, the habits, the discoveries and improvements, the productions and fabrics, of other civilized nations. Thus bringing home facts and suggestions, perfecting our existing manufactures, and adding new ones to our domestic stock; opening, at the same time, new markets for the product of our manufacturing and commercial industry, and qualifying ourselves for supplying them.

The committee declare it to be their opinion, that by these means alone, and above all by the effect of machinery in improving the quality and cheapening the fabrication of our various articles of export, notwithstanding a continually accumulating weight of taxes, and with all the necessaries and comforts of life gradually increasing in price, (the effects of which on the wages of labour could not but be very considerable,) our commerce and manufactures have also been increasing in such a degree as to surpass the most sanguine calculations of the ablest political writers who have speculated on the improvements of a future age. The exports of woollen goods at the time of this report, (1807,) amounted to six millions of pounds official, or nine millions of real value.

It appeared also to be an important consideration, of which we should never lose sight, that we are at this day surrounded by powerful and civilized nations, who are intent on cultivating their manufactures and pushing their commerce; and who are more eager to become our competitors in trade, from having witnessed the astonishing effect of our commercial prosperity. The attempts which have been made to carry our machines and implements over to foreign countries, and to tempt our artisans to settle in those countries, evince the importance of machinery, under the directions of men of approved skill, in constructing and using them. It is needless to remark how much these attempts would be favoured by our throwing any obstructions in the way of enterprize and ingenuity. and the free application of capital in this country; for any machines which should be prohibited here would infallibly find their way into foreign nations in a very short time.


https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.461619/page/n487/mode/thumb?q=%22Plate+III.+Woollen+Manufacture%22
A selection From The Cyclopaedia Or Universal Dictionary Of Arts, sciences And Literature
by Cossons, Neil Ed.

Publication date 1820

illustrations https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.461619/page/n494/mode/1up?q=%22Plate+III.+Woollen+Manufacture%22


---
https://www.jstor.org/stable/4285190
The shearmen and the Wiltshire Outrages of 1802: Trade Unionism and Industrial Violence
Adrian J. Randall

social History
Vol. 7, No. 3 (Oct., 1982), pp. 283-304 (22 pages)



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Woollen_Manufacture_Act_1809

1803? 1805? then 1809





https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/The_Cyclop%C3%A6dia_Or_Universal_Dictionary.html?id=qfQfOCasRvcC&redir_esc=y

The Cyclopædia; Or, Universal Dictionary of Arts, sciences, and Literature. By Abraham Rees, ... with the Assistance of Eminent Professional Gentlemen. Illustrated with Numerous Engravings, by the Most Distinguished Artists. In Thirty-nine Volumes. Vol. 1 [- 39], Volume 34


STOCKING-FRAME, a most ingenious machine for weaving or knitting of stockings. To comprehend the action of this machine, which is extremely complicated, it is first necessary to have a perfect idea of the nature of the fabric which is produced by it: this is totally distinct from cloth woven by a loom, as the slightest inspection will shew; for instead of having two distinct systems of threads, like the warp and the weft, which are woven together, by crossing each other at right angles, the whole piece is composed of a single thread, united or looped together in a peculiar manner, which is called stocking-stitch, and sometimes chain-work.

This is best explained by the view in fig. 1. Plate stocking-frame. A single thread is formed into a number of loops or waves, by arranging it over a number of parallel needles, as shewn at R: these are retained or kept in the form of loops or waves, by being drawn or looped through similar loops or waves formed by the thread of the preceding course of the work, s. The fabric thus formed by the union of a number of loops is easily unravelled, because the stability of the whole piece depends upon the ultimate fastening of the first end of the thread; and if this is undone, the loops formed by that end will open, and release the subsequent loops one at a time, until the whole is unravelled, and drawn out into the single thread from which it was made.

In the same manner, if the thread in a stocking piece fails or breaks at any part, or drops a stitch, as it is called, it immediately produces a hole, and the extenfion of the hole can only be prevented by fastening the end. It should be obferved, that there are many different fabrics of stocking- stitch for various kinds of ornamental hosiery, and as each requires a different kind of frame or machine to produce it,
we should greatly exceed our limits to enter into a detailed description of them all. That species which we have represented in fig. 1. is the common stocking-stitch used for plain hosiery, and is formed by the machine called the common stocking-frame, which is the ground-work of all the others.
Fig. 2. is a perspective view of a common stocking-frame,
exhibiting as many of its parts as can be seen in a general view.
The basis is a wooden frame, confifting of four pillars N, and various cross-pieces, called rafters : the two uppermost, M, are called caps: upon the top of these the small parts of the ma- chine are fituated, being sustained in a frame of wrought iron.
The pieces which compose the iron frame are two fole-bars w, which are screwed down upon the wooden caps M, and at the ends have joints, g, to support the preffer-bows G,G, of which we shall foon have occafion to speak. At the back are two vertical standards, V, called the back standards, which
support the axis T. These standards are united by back cross-bars, which are clearly seen in the figure near V. There are likewife two front standards W, erected from the fole-bars w, w.
To give motion to this machine, the workman seats him- self before it, upon a board or feat A, and puts the different parts of the machine in motion by his hands and feet :
he applies his feet upon two treadles B, C, which have cords,
b, c, afcending from them, and passing in oppofite directions round a barrel or wheel, upon the axis of which is a large wheel,D, called the slur-wheel. By alternately pressing down one treadle, and allowing the other to rise, he can turn this wheel round in either direction at pleasure. The object of this movement will be described hereafter. There is like- wise a third treadle, E, upon which he presses his foot, when he wishes to bring down what is called the presser-bar, marked F, the use of which will be afterwards explained. This bar is attached to two arms or levers G, which are move- able round the fixed centre pins or joints g. The ends of the levers are of a curved form ; hence the pieces Gar

the presser-bows. The connection with the treadle Eis by a
string or wire e, which afcends behind the machine, and is attached to the cross-bar H, which is extended from one of the presser-bows to the other, and is cranked down, to avoid fuch parts of the machine as it would otherwise intercept in its motion. The return of the presser and middle treadle, E,
is produced by the re-action of the wooden spring I, which draws it up with two strings; but in some frames a counter-weight is used instead of the spring. The weaver produces all the other movements by his hands: for this purpose, he applies them to the ends K, K, of the hand-bar, and he can then very conveniently press his thumbs upon the thumb-plates L, L. By drawing forward or lifting up the hand-bar K, and at the same time preffing upon the thumb-plates L, or relieving them, he gives the requifite motions to what is called the frame of finkers, or fimply the frame, because it contains the principal works of the machine. The thread of which the stocking is to be made is kept upon a bobbin M, stuck upon a pin in the front upright, N, of the frame, and the thread from this is carried upon the needles; and when it is woven into the stocking piece by the action of the needles and finkers, the piece hangs down at s, and is received upon a small roller fixed in an iron framep, called the web, which is made fufficiently heavy to stretch the piece to a moderate tenfion.
As an introduction to a description of the whole machine, it will be proper to give the reader an idea of those parts which operate upon the thread, and of the motions which are given to them to produce the loops or meshes. These parts are the needles, the frame of finkers, and the presser-bar: the needles are stationary, the rest moveable.
Fig. 1. reprefents what are called the needles : these are made of iron-wire, of the shape represented, and are hooked or barbed at the ends, the returned points of the hooks or barbs being made very delicate. There is a small cavity or groove punched or funk in the stem of the needle, immediately beneath the barb, of sufficient depth to receive the point, when an adequate pressure is applied upon the hook to bend the barb down. The barb then becomes a
closed eye; and if a thread is looped over the wire or ftem of the needle, and drawn forwards while the barb is thus closed, it will draw over the barb of the needle, and come off at the end of it : but if the thread is drawn forwards
whilft the barb is open, it will be caught under the hook,
and be thus detained, as shewn at R. This circumstance must be particularly attended to, as the principal action of the machine depends upon it. The depreffion of the barbs of the needles is produced by the edge of the presser-bar F, which is extended horizontally over the whole length of the needles, and actuated by pressing the foot on the middle treadle, as before explained.
Between every two adjacent needles, 1, 1, a thin plate of fteel, 2, 3, is placed : these plates are called finkers ; they are formed to a particular shape (as shewn in fig. 4.),
and are capable of being elevated or depressed, and also of being drawn backwards or forwards between the needles .
These motions are given by the hands of the weaver, as the hand-bar K, which he holds, is part of the frame containing the jacks and finkers. The finker-frame confifts of the hand- bar KK (fig. 2 or4.), extending across it at the bottom;
the hanging cheeks O, O, which form the upright fides of the frame; and the upper bar P, which is called the finker-bar, because the finkers are fixed to it, being united several together in pieces of lead each an inch wide, which are cast round the ends of the finkers, and faftened by screws to the bar P.
To allow the frame of finkers to have the motions of
which we have spoken, it is suspended byjoints at the top of the hanging-cheeks, called the top joints: these joints are formed at the ends of the top arms, Q, Q, which are
two horizontal levers fixed to an axis T, called the spindle- bar: the extremities ofthis turn on pivots, supported by the upper ends of iron uprights V, called the back standards.
By the motion of the spindle-bar upon its centres, the frame of finkers can rife and fall, and the quantity of this motion is limited by stop-fcrews applied to the vertical standards W. To draw the finkers forward between the needles, the finker-frame can be inclined upon the top joints of the hanging-cheeks, by drawing forwards the hand- bar K. From the middle of the spindle-bar, T, a short lever projects, which is borne upwards by a spring, Y,
called the main-spring: this is supported by apiece which projects from the fixed cross-bar of the frame, and is of sufficient force to bear the frame of finkers upward, and give the top arms, Q, Q, a tendency to rest always against the upper stop-screws, X, of the standards W. The hooked part or nips f (fig. 4.) of the sinkers, are for the purpose of forming loops in the thread between the needles. To effect this, the nips,f, of the jacks and finkers are raised above the level of the needles, as in fig. 4, and the thread is extended across all the needles, immediately beneath the nips. If then the jacks and finkers are all pressed down between the needles, it is evident that the nips of the finkers must carry the thread down before them, and form it into loops hanging down between each needle, as shewn at X. This, then, is the principal office of the sinkers : but to perform the operation of finking in the manner now de- scribed, by depressing the whole number at once, would not be practicable ; because, as a greater length of thread is required when it is depressed into loops, than when it lies straight across the needles, it would require to draw the thread all at once from the bobbin M (fig. 2. ), in sufficient quantity to make up the difference ; todo which, the thread must slide or draw beneath between the nips and the needles,
which it could not do, on account of the friction.
The contrivance to render this depression or looping down of the thread between each needle practicable is very in- genious. The row of finkers shewn in fig. 4. is composed of two kinds, called jack-finkers and lead-finkers, which are very different in their movements, although we have hitherto spoken of them as one. The lead-finkers are all
those of which we have spoken as being fastened to one bar P, called the finker-bar, which is part of the finker-frame,
and which the workman moves by his hands: on this account,
the lead-finkers all move together; they re one half of the whole number, and are disposed between every other needle,
so that the space between each lead-finker has two needles in it. The jack-finkers are made of the same form as the lead-finkers, one being placed between each of the two needles contained between every lead-finker; therefore the lead-finkers and jack-finkers are disposed alternately to form a row, and a needle is placed in every space in the whole Each jack-finker is supported by a small lever, hi,
(fig. 3.) called a jack, freely movable on a centre-pin:
the oppofite end i, or tail of each jack, is pressed by a
spring k, which has a notch or indentation at a particular place; and when the jack-finker is elevated, so that its nip,f,
is above the level of the needles 1, ready to receive the thread,
the end of the tail, i, is received in the notch of the spring k,
which retains it in that position; but at the same time a flight force applied beneath the tail, i, of the jack to lift it up will depress the nip,f, of the jack-finker, 3, between the needles.
It is to be understood, that all the jacks, ib, are arranged in a
row, and move upon one wire, which is a common centre of motion

ginning at one end of the row, and proceeding one by one to the other. To effect this, a straight iron bar, or ruler 1,
called the flur-bar, is extended beneath all the jacks, and upon this a piece of metal, m, called the flur, travels, with rollers to reduce the friction: it is drawn by a line extended from each fide, and conducted over a pulley n, at each end of the bar 1, to be carried round the flur-wheel D, fig. 2.
We have before explained how an alternate motion is given to this wheel, by the action of the two feet upon the two treadles B, C: it is plain by this connection, that the flur, m,
can be made to travel from one end of the flur-bar, 1, to the
other, and in so doing, that it will elevate the tails, i, of all the jacks, i, b, beneath which it paffes, and produce a correfponding depreffion of the jack-finkers, 3, between the needles . After the flur has passed, the jacks retain the position given to them by the pressure of the springs k.
The operation of finking or forming the loops between the needles is thus conducted: the nips of all the finkers are raised above the needles, as in fig. 4; the thread is then extended lightly across the stems of the needles, beneath the nips f. By preffing on one of the treadles, B or C, the flur-wheel D is made to turn round, and this, by the slur-line,
draws the flur, m, from one end of the flur-bar, 1, to the other.
In its passage it encounters the tails, i, of the jack, and lifts them up one by one, which at the fame time depresses the corresponding jack-finker 3 ; and its nip,f, finks the thread between the needles, and forms a loop. As these loops are formed fucceffively, the thread draws easily beneath the nip to produce each fingle loop, and the workman allows the threads to draw off from the bobbin, M, through his fingers, as fast as it is required. When all the jack-finkers are depressed, a loop of the thread will be formed between every other pair of needles. The workman then depresses the lead-finkers, 4, by pulling down the hand-bar K, and their nips carry down the thread between the remaining needles in loops, in the intermediate spaces between the for- mer loops : in doing this, he causes the jack-finkers, 4, to rife up, as much as he depresses the lead-finkers 3 ; because it should have been mentioned before, that the first loops formed by the jack-finkers were double the depth intended, although only half the number: by this means they contained the proper quantity of thread to form the whole number of loops ; viz. one between every two adjacent needles .
The jack-finkers are caused to rise up by means of the locker-bar, p, extending over all their tails i. Each end of this bar is screwed to a lever, g, called a locker, which moves upon the fame centre as the jacks, and the front ends of these levers are made with inclined ends, so as to be lifted up by wedges fixed at the back of the thumb-plates,
L, which move on joints fixed to the finker-bar, and hang down in a convenient fituation to be acted upon by the thumbs of each hand, when holding the ends of the hand- bar K. The weaver, therefore, presses back the two thumb- plates L, at the fame time that he depresses the hand-bar, K,
of the frame containing the lead-finkers ; by which means he produces the afcent of the jack-finkers, in an equal degree to the defcent of the lead-finkers, until the nips of the two arrange exactly in one line, which pofition is determined by proper ftops attached to the finker-frame. By this means, a complete row ofl oops is formed, one loop between each needle.
These loops are now to be carried backwards upon the needles, into the position of s, fig. 1 , so as to occupy the arch or opening, s, of the finkers, which open part is made purposely to admit the loops last made to remain upon the stems of the needles, quite detached from the action of the VOL. XXXIV.
finkers, which are at liberty to form a new course of loops by the nips, f, of their points t.
If we suppose the frame has been before at work, the loops last formed, which hang upon the stems of the needles ,
will not be a single thread, but the loops at the upper part of the work s, fig. 1 : it is only when the frame first begins to work that the loops will be a detached thread, as we have juft described.
But it remains to shew how the loops are put back upon the needles: this is done by merely lifting up the hand-bar K, till the points, t, of the finkers rife above the needles : the hand-bar is then drawn forwards a little, to
advance the finkers so much, that the points t, which were behind the loops of thread upon the needles, will now come before them, and then the hands are depressed, to infert the points, t, between the needles again before the threads; and by pushing back the hand-bar, the points, t, carry back the work upon the stems of the needles, so that it will be fituated in the arch, or opening, s, of the tinkers.
When the finkers advance or recede, they must all move together both the lead-finkers and jack-finkers, as if they were one. It is clear that there is no impediment to the
moving forwards of the lead-finkers, because they are at liberty to incline or swing forwards upon the joints at the tops of the hanging-cheeks, O, O, which suspend the frame containing them : but for the jack-finkers to advance at the fame time, it is necessary to bring forward the jacks, and their centre of motion, together with the springs and flur-bar. To admit of this motion, all those parts are framed upon a strong bar called the camel ; and upon this is placed four wheels, which run upon the fole-bars, so as to become a carriage. To communicate motion to this carriage, a link is jointed to a piece at each end, marked r,fig. 2or 4, which is screwed to the finker-bar P, just within the thumb- plates L. These links are jointed at the other ends to the common centre of motion of the jacks. The joints of the pieces, r, are so adjusted, that they will exactly line with the joints which unite the jacks and jack-finkers together ;
and the links are the fame length between the centres as the jacks, for which reason they are called half-jacks.
By means of this connection, the carriage, with all its appendages, viz. the jacks, with their springs and the flur- bar, are drawn forwards at the same time that the finker-frame is drawn forwards, by pulling thehand-bar KK; or,
by a contrary movement, the loops of threads which were last formed upon the needles, will be carried back from the hooks or beards of the needles upon their stems, as shewn at s,fig. 1 , so as to be in the arch, s, of the finkers, as before described.
The first row of loops being thus disposed of, the frame of finkers is restored to its former position, and a second row is formed upon the stems of the needles by a repetition of the same process, viz. extending the thread across the needles beneath the nips, f, of the finkers ; moving the slur by the two outside treadles B, C, which depresses all the jack-finkers, and makes a loop of double depth between every other pair of needles : this is called drawing the jacks : next preffing on the thumb-plates L, and depreffing the hand-bar, K, at the same time, which elevates the jack-finkers, and depresses the lead-finkers by one movement,
and produces a loop of thread between every two adjacent needles. Another complete row of loops is now formed upon the stems of the needles ; and this row is to be brought forwards, fo as to be under the beards or hooks of the needles, in the manner shewn by R, pg. 1. This is
produced by fimply drawing forwards the hand-bar. K,

which advances all the finkers together, and their points, t,
push forwards the thread till it comes into the beards, and these prevent it from coming off the needles.
The next operation is lifting up the hand-bar and frame of finkers as much as will raise their points, t, quite clear up above the needles between which they were situated, and applying the foot on the upper treadle E, to bring down the preffing-bar, F, upon the beards of the needles, to close them up, and while fo closed, they hold the loops of thread at R, as if they were looped through the eyes of as many needles. The upper loops of the works which are at s,
fig. 1, upon the stems of the needles, in the arch, s, of the finkers, are next brought forward upon the needles, by drawing forwards the frame of finkers ; but in advancing these loops, draw over the closed beards of the needles, and confequently over the last-formed hoops, which remain under the beards, in the position shewn at R, fig. 1 ; or, in other words, the loops last formed, and resting under the beards atR,fig. 1, are drawn through the loops of the upper or laft course of the finished work which remained upon the stems of the needles, as represented at s. By this means,
the loops of what was the upper or last course of the finished work, become secured from opening or unravelling, and the loops under the beards now become the last or upper course of the work, and are preserved from unravelling by the needles, one of which passes through each loop ; and these loops will not be drawn off from the needles until there is another row of loops prepared, and referved under the beards of the needles, ready to be drawn through them.
Whenthe piece of work is finished, and taken off from the frame, the laft made row of loops must be fecured by running a thread through them, or other means, or they would draw through the preceding loops, and release them, which in like manner would release their predeceffors, and so the whole piece would unravel.
The motion of the frame of finkers, which produces the ad- vance of the finkers towards the points of the needles, or their receffion towards the stem, takes place upon the centres,
called the top joints 00, and the wheels of the carriage, as before mentioned. The quantity of motion is limited by a
piece,fig. 7, called the arch, which is fixed faft against the infide of the wood-frame N,fig. 2 : a part of the hanging-cheeks 0,0, of the frame of finkers defcends with a projecting partto act round this arch, which, at the fame time that it limits the quantity of motion,prevents the motion being made, except in a proper fucceffion, to produce the effects before described.
Thus, when the hook is beneath the arch, the points, t, of the finkers will be beneath the level of the needles, and then thef rame offinkers cannot be raised up without first moving the lower part of the frame either forwards or backwards.
In the same manner, when the hook is above the arch, the
finkers cannot be depressed till they are moved. When the thread is first extended across the needles, in order to be sunk into loops, the frame is faid to be over the arch, that is, the hook is at the back, or on the farther fide of the arch, and by applying thereto,the finkers are guided in their sinking,
that is, when they defcend, they depress the thread to form the loop. When this finking has taken place, the finker-frame will be at its lowest position, and the top arms, Q, will reft upon the lower ftop-fcrew of the standards W. When the finkers are brought forwards, to draw the loops from the ftems of the needles into their beards or points, the hook of the frame moves along the under fide of the arch, and this prevents the points lifting up, while the lower stop prevents them from finking down : but when the finkers are brought fufficiently forwards, the frame is lifted or thrown up by the
main-spring, the hook following the curvature of the arch,
until the points are completely above the needles, or the frame has reached the upper stop. The finkers are then brought forwards upon their centre of motion, while the presser is drawn down to close the beards of the needles and draw the loops over them; in doing which, the hook quits the arch, and the frame comes forwards without any guide,
the same being unneceflary, because the elevation of the finkers is determined by the upper ftop, against which the frame rises by the action of its main-spring; and the proper degree for the advance of the finkers is determined by the drawing forwards of the frame with fufficient force to draw the loops of the work tight : this force the workman must regulate by habit, so as make his work close.
In returning the frame of finkers, in order to put back the work upon the stems of the needles, so as to be out of the way while a new row of loops is made, the hook, 9, muft be carried back beneath the arch, which will keep down the points of the finkers, fo as to prevent them from rifing above the needles, as they would then quit the work they are in- tended to drive back upon the needles .
By the operation which we have described, one course of the work is formed; but, to render it more clear, we will continue the description, in a few words, of the working of another course. Preparatory to working it, the loops of the last course of the work, and by which the work is fufpended from the needles, must be pushed back upon the stems of the needles to the pofition s, fig. 1, so as to come into the arched or open parts, fig. 4, of the finkers : this is done by depressing the finkers low enough for their point, t,
to enter between the needles, and then pushing back the hand-bar and frame of the finkers to carry back the work upon the stems of the needles. This is the fituation in which we fuppofe the frame, when the operation commences ; and the frame is over the arch .
The first movement is the gathering of thread. The thread laid over is lightly extended across the needles,
beneath the nips,f, of the finkers ; and by preffing the flur-treadle BC, the jack-finkers are depressed one by one, so as to form double loops. This is called drawing the jacks.
The second movement is sinking. This is done by drawing down the hand-bar K, and bearing upon the thumb- plates, L, at the fame time : the whole row of lead-finkers is thus depreffed, whilft thej ack-finkers rise, and the thread is carried down into a loop between every two needles .
The third movement is to bring the frame forwards under the arch. This is done by drawing the hand-bar forwards,
and the row of loops just made is brought under the beards of the needles.
The fourth movement is to bring the work forwards from the stem of the needles. To do this, the finker-frame is lifted,
up, by elevating the hand-bar K, fo that the point, t, of the finkers will be quite drawn out above the needles ; and in this fituation, the hand-bar and finker-frame being brought forwards, the breast or curved part of the arch, s, of the finker will bring forwards the piece of work which hangs upon the stems of the needles, by its loops last made.
The fifth movement is clofing the work, or drawing the loops last made, through the finished loops of the work.
The preffer-treadle E, being borne upon at the fame moment, will bring down the preffer, and it will bear upon the beards, andclose them, while the loops are drawn forwards; consequently the loops of the old work will be drawn over the beards, and quite off from the needles : this draws the loops thereof over the loops last made, which reII main

inain in the beards of the needles. To draw the work tight,
the hand-bar, K, is drawn forwards two or three times with a flight jerk, so as to extend all the loops to their fulleft quantity, and make the loops of the work unite closely.
The course is now finished ; but as a preparation for making another course, the work must be carried back upon the stems of the needles into the situation of s, fig. 1. This is the fixth and last movement. To put back work, the frame is pulled down to bring the points of the finkers below the level of the needles; and in this pofition, by preffing back the hand-bar, and all the finkers together,
the points, t, will enter between the ends of the needles,
and carry back the loops of the work upon the stems of the needles, where it will remain in the arches of the finkers, so as to be detached from them, and out of the way, while a
new fet of loops is formed by the nips of the points of the sinkers; and then the loops of the old work are to be drawn over those last made.
The movements are then repeated: Ist, gathering the thread upon the needles, and depressing it into large loops between every two needles, by the motion of the slur;
2d, finking, to make the loops between all the needles ;
3d, bringing the thread under the beards of the needles ;
4th, bringing the work forwards from the stems of the needles towards the beards ; 5th, closing the beards by the pressure of the presser-bar, and drawing the work over the beards ; and, 6th, putting the work back on the needles,
ready for working another course.
The operation of the machine proceeds in the manner described; and as fast as the courses are completed, the work descends lower, and hangs down in a web from the needles. When the piece is of a confiderable length, it is rolled upon a roller, in an iron frame p, called the web,
and the weight of the frame is sufficient to keep the piece to a proper tenfion. The roller in the web can be turned round occafionally to wind up the piece, and is retained by a ratchet-wheel and click.
Having given an idea of the manner of the operation of this curious machine, it only remains to explain the adjustments with which it is provided, in order to make it work correctly.
The fineness of the work depends on the number of loops which the thread will make in any given length, and this will be equal to the number of needles and finkers in the same space. The number of needles in an inch is called the gauge of the frame, and they vary from 15 to 40,
which latter are used for the finest stockings. The gauge of a frame cannot be altered when it is once made, and the work which it will produce must always be of the fame degree of fineness, although it may be made a little more dense or more flight by drawing the loops very close,
or by allowing a greater quantity of thread, and making the loops longer. This circumstance will evidently depend upon the depth to which the nips of the finkers descend between the needles, when they carry down the thread into loops,
To regulate this depth,the needle-bar, or that piece which fuftains the leads containing the row of needles, is made to rife or fall a flight quantity, by means of two long adjusting screws, the heads of which are made with notches, and springs fall into them to keep the screws from turning back: these heads are called the star, and the notches nicks:
one is marked 9, in figs. 2 and 3 .
The motion allowed to the frame of finkers is limited, as before-mentioned, by stops projecting from the two upright standards, W; and through these stops, stop-screws, x,
are fitted, to regulate the degree of afcent and defcent.
The main-spring, y, is made of fufficient strength to lift the
weight of the frame of finkers, and make them always rise up as high as the upper stop-screws will permit.
The manner of making different parts of the stocking-frame is worthy of notice. The needles are made of iron- wire, of a proper degree of fineness: it must be of good quality, as that which is liable to split or splinter, either in filing, punching, or bending, is totally unfit for the purpose. The wire is cut to lengths, and annealed or foftened in a box of charcoal, in which they are heated to redness, and suffered to cool gradually. The needles are next punched with the small cavity which is necessary to receive the point of the beard: this is done by a simple screw-press. The point of the needle is next formed by the file and burnisher,
and the hooks are then bent to form the barb : next the needles are flattened, each with a blow of the hammer. Το
faften these needles together, and fix them in the machine,
they are placed parallel to each other in a mould or frame,
and tin or pewter poured into the mould, round the flattened ends of the stems. The piece of lead or pewter is just an inch in width, and the number of needles which it will contain, gives the denomination to the gauge of the frame.
These leads of needles are fastened to the needle-bar by a
screw through each. The lead-finkers are made of steel-plates, which are put together by cafting lead round them at the upper ends, in the fame manner as the needles. The rack or piece, which contains the centre of thejacks, is called the comb, because it is composed of a number of small plates, fixed into a bar by casting them with lead or tin.
The ftocking-frame has undergone very few alterations fince its first invention, a circumstance highly creditable to the genius of the inventor. A stocking-frame for weaving the tartan plaid hose which is worn in scotland, is described in the society of Arts Transactions, vol. xxix. p. 84 : it contains fome additions invented by Mr. John Robertson.