
--
https://archive.org/details/skilledlabourer00hammiala/mode/2up
The skilled labourer, 1760-1832
by Hammond, J. L. (John Lawrence), 1872-1949; Hammond, Barbara Bradby, 1873-1962


TO DO 

Publication date 1919
pp341-376

Also appendix, p377-8

CHAPTER XII THE ADVENTURES OF OLIVER THE SPY

' Close by the ever-burning brimstone beds,  
Where Bedloe, Gates, and Judas hide their heads,  
I saw great Satan like a Sexton stand  
With his intolerable spade in hand  
Digging three graves. Of coffin shape they were,  
For those who coffinless must enter there  
With unblest rites. The shrouds were of that cloth  
Which Clotho weaveth in her blackest wrath:  
The dismal tinct oppress'd the eye that dwelt  
Upon it long, like darkness to be felt.  
The pillows to these baleful beds were toads,  
Large, living, livid, melancholy loads,  
Whose softness shock'd. Worms of all monstrous size  
Craw'l round; and one, upcoil'd, which never dies.  
A doleful bell, inculcating despair,  
Was always ringing in the heavy air;  
And all about the detestable pit  
Strange headless ghosts, and quarter'd forms did flit;  
Rivers of blood from dripping traitors spilt,  
By treachery slung from poverty to guilt.  
I ask'd the fiend for whom those rites were meant?  
"These graves," quoth he, "when life's brief oil is spent,  
When the dark night comes, and they 're sinking bedwards,  
I mean for Castles, Oliver, and Edwards."' `[Lamb, 'The Three Graves.']`

THE reader who took his history of the year 1817 from the Reports of the Secret Committees of the House of Lords and of the House of Commons,`[See Hansard, June 12 and 20, 1817.]` reports which the authors described as 'substantiated, in almost every particular, by depositions on oath taken before magistrates,' would picture the manufacturing districts of the North and the Midlands as seething with revolutionary fury only held in check by the powers given to the executive under the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act. The first proof of the 'traitorous conspiracy for the overthrow of our established government and constitution, and for the subversion of the existing order of Society' he would find in the plan for a great march from Manchester to London with the avowed intention of presenting petitions to the Prince Regent, with the real intention of using force if their petition was not granted. But no sooner was this attempt mercifully frustrated by the vigilance of the authorities than the rebels proceeded to 're-organise the party,' and a general insurrection was planned to take place in Manchester on March 30, in the course of which magistrates were to be seized, factories were to be set on fire, soldiers were to be overpowered. 'This atrocious conspiracy,' he would learn with relief, 'was detected by the vigilance of the magistrates, and defeated by the apprehension and confinement of some of the ringleaders a few days before the period fixed for its execution.'

In spite of this blow to their plans, delegates from Manchester, Birmingham, Nottingham, Derby, Leeds, Sheffield, Wakefield, Huddersfield, and elsewhere continued to meet in secret and 'to combine some general plan of simultaneous, or connected insurrection; the object of which was, after consolidating a sufficient force, to march upon London, and there to overturn the existing Government and to establish a republic.' Thanks however to the timely arrest of these assembled delegates on June 6,  the final arrangement of the plan which was there to be settled, was thus happily frustrated,' though the spirit which had been excited could not be wholly suppressed and showed itself first in an outbreak at Huddersfield on the night of June 8, where, in spite of the retreat of the insurgents, 'guns fired as signals, in different directions, and lights shown on the heights throughout the country, sufficiently proved the extent of the confederacy, and the concert with which it was organized,' and secondly in 'a more open insurrection' on June 9 in Derbyshire, when two hundred insurgents armed with pikes or firearms marched towards Nottingham, but were cut off on the way 'by detachments of cavalry (under the orders of active and intelligent magistrates).' The reader would learn, finally, that in spite of the successful repression of 'the late insurrection on the borders of Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire,' the committee who had access to all the reports on the subject considered the ordinary powers of the law insufficient to cope with the grave spirit of disaffection.

What relation does this lurid picture bear to the actual course of events? It will be best to answer this question by giving a narrative of what happened, a narrative based mainly on the Home Office Papers, which contain the documents on which the Reports of the Secret Committees are based. We shall find the main actor in the latter part of the story to be a certain Mr. Oliver, alias Richards, alias Hollis, celebrated by Lamb in the verses quoted at the head of this chapter, who, although his activities pass unrecorded in the Reports of the Secret Committees, figures extensively both in the Home Office Papers and in subsequent debates in the House of Commons.

The earlier events at Manchester, in which Oliver had no share, fall into two divisionsfirst, the march of the Blanketeers on March 10; second, that 'most daring and traitorous conspiracy' for March 30. We will take these two episodes in order. The unfortunate Blanketeers' march was organised by two of the more hot-headed amongst the working-class reformers, Bagguley and Drummond. `[See p. 101 above. Bamford says that the scheme of the march came from London ( *Passages in the Life of a Radical*, p. 32). Prentice mentions a story that it was approved of by Cartwrigpt and Cobbett (Prentice, op. cit. , pp. 93-94)]` The other leaders dissuaded or, as Bagguley considered, deserted them. `[H.O., 42. 164.]` The spinners were also connected with the plan.

To understand the material of misery on which Bagguley and Drummond worked for their scheme, it is worth while to glance at some statements about weavers' earnings and deductions, published in the Manchester *Political Register* for January 4:

8 (1) Weekly receipt for Week's Expenses *. d. Is. 5d. of particular Rent . . .19 kind of warp which Fire . . .10 a man weaves in s. d. Sizing warp . .03 5 weeks . . 6 4| Looming . .03 Size or Sowan for do. 3 Soft soap, tallow, oil 2 Candles . . .04 Soap for family and washing . .04 

Leaving 2s. Ofd. for support. 

(2) Journeyman doing same Weekly deductions work s. d. for loom room, &c., s. d. Weekly receipt . 6 4 one-fourth . . 1 7 Sizing warp . .03 Looming . .03 Candles . . .04 Lodging, cooking, and washing . . .16 

. 3  * SeeH.O., 42. 158. Some technical detail* are omitted. 

Leaving 2s. 5|d. 3 11^ (3) For another sort of warp Aged man weaves a cut a week, and his wife winds the picking. Weekly receipts for Weekly deductions s. d. weaving and wind- s. d. Rent . . .19 ing . .40 Fire . . . 10 Sizing warp . .03 Looming . .03 Size or Sowan for do. 3 Candles . . .04 Soft soap, tallow and oil . .02 Soap for family washing * . .02 

The *Political Register* declares that these budgets far exceed the average earnings of any considerable number. How do such people subsist? it asks. The answer is that they do not pay outgoings such as rent, and that they depend on parochial and private relief.

The plan of the great march was carefully organised. It was to be all open and above board, and the constables were invited to attend. Bagguley had unearthed some Act of the time of Charles n., `[H.O.,42. 164.]` from which he had got the idea that it was legal for ten out of every twenty petitioners to go and present their petition. Hence the idea of a great march to London to present petitions to the Prince Regent. There would be a leader for every ten, and a leader for every hundred, and if any man wanted anything he was to apply to his leader of ten, who next applied to the leader of the hundred, who in turn would apply to the 'provisioners.' It was calculated that in six days they would reach London and that they would have to sleep on the ground or in churches on the way, hence the need for blankets. The question of support on the way had to be considered. It was suggested that those remaining behind at work should contribute 2s. 6d., 3s., even 5s. a week or what they could afford either to the families of the marchers or to the marchers themselves. The arrangements for commissariat were perhaps a little vague. 'A gentleman,' Bagguley told the would-be marchers, 'has calculated that you can do it on oatmeal and water.' `[ H.O., 42. 164.]`

The spinners took an active part in the organisation of the march. To the surprise of the magistrates, though exempt from the pressure of the times, they were discontented. This is perhaps less surprising to others, seeing that their wages are said to have fallen by one-third from 1814 to 1817. `[Committee on Artisans and Machinery, 1824, p. 411.]` They were said to have given 5s. each in addition to the donation of 20 from the box of a Friendly Society. `[H.O., 40. 10.]` About this donation full particulars were sent to the authorities from a firm of employers two of whose men had been deputed to give the sum. `[Ibid., 42. 161.]` The Society was a Sick Club composed of the spinners from nine or ten mills, and founded only the previous Whitsuntide with the sole ostensible object of relieving the sick and burying the dead. `[It is, of course, impossible to say how far the statements about these clubs are true.]` The club had about 30 in hand, and out of this the majority of subscribing mills had voted about £22 'towards defraying the Expenses of carrying Petitions to be presented to His Royal Highness the Prince Regent begging Redress of grievances.' The men, however, who were appointed to present the money arrived too late at the meeting. One Meldrum was sent by the spinners by coach to London, to look after the proceedings, but he was arrested on the way at Nottingham as a suspicious character. `[H.O., 42. 164, and 42. 161.]`

Each petitioner was to carry his petition wrapped in a bit of brown paper and tied round his right arm with a bow of white tape. `[Ibid., 42. 164.]` Some well-thumbed copies of the petition, written or printed, lie amongst the Home Office Papers. `[Ibid., 42. 162.]` It is difficult enough to understand how the authorities could connect this pathetic and futile outcry with any 'traitorous conspiracy.' Before the last war, say the petitioners, we neither felt nor feared difficulties and privations, our repeated applications have been disregarded, taxation has been quadrupled, rent has doubled, the whole produce of the Kingdom is absorbed and nothing is left for us. Had the House of Commons been appointed by the people at large these evils could not have happened, nor would the Corn Bill nor the Libel Law nor the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act have been passed. Hence we pray you to dismiss your Ministers. Our lives are in your hands; if you will not relieve us, 'we can neither support you nor ourselves.' The marchers were far from being the active revolutionaries pictured by the Secret Committee. To judge from their subsequent depositions few had clear ideas of their object or the meaning of the petition. They only knew that times were bad and that this plan might bring some help. When one of them who said he was going to London about the Habeas Corpus was asked what the Habeas Corpus was, he answered, 'he could not tell but it was to mend the trade.' `[H.O., 42. 161.]` Another was going 'to petition the Prince to make a better living.' A childish belief in the power of the first gentleman in Europe to redress their wrongs was held by many of the marchers. 'All I was to say,' said one of them, 'when we were to go down on our knees before the Prince was to ask him for help the most miserable looking of us was to kneel down and the others to take the petition and the Prince would then tell us why trade was so slack.' [`ibid., 42. 162.]`

The 10th of March was the day appointed for starting. There was to be a 'send off' from a meeting in St. Peter's Fields. The majority of the marchers were weavers, few were over thirty, many were under twenty. `[Ibid., 40. 10.]` Their womenkind seem to have used some violent language. 'The Women of the lower Class,' wrote Mr. Evans, the stipendiary magistrate, afterwards, 'seem to take a strong part against the Preservation of good Order, and in the course of the morning of the 10th it was a very general and undisguised Cry amongst them that the Gentry had had the upper Hand long enough and that their turn was now come.' `[Ibid., 42. 162.]`

No dangerous sentiments are reported to have been uttered by the would-be marchers themselves. The plan, however, seemed full of danger to the authorities. Nadin, writes Mr. Hay, J.P., says that 'as they go through the country they will breed a Commotion in the towns as they go along and by that they will have a heavy body together and try at a Revolution.' `[H.O., 42. 161.]` It was decided that the desperadoes must be stopped. The meeting was allowed to take place, but a detachment of dragoons under General Byng rode up and surrounded the hustings, whilst the civil authorities (special constables) arrested twenty-nine persons including Bagguley and Drummond. `[Ibid., 42. 161. Was the Riot Act read? J. E. Taylor thinks probably not (see Prentice, op. cit. , p. 93). Cf. Peterloo.]` This had the effect of dispersing the meeting, but several hundred marchers had already set out. The dragoons, yeomanry, and special constables set off after them and came upon the main body as they were stepping quietly along, before they reached Stockport; one hundred and sixty-seven were taken prisoners and sent back to Manchester. Only one man, John James, was killed, and he had nothing to do with the Blanketeers. He was watching the procession from his garden in Heaton Norris when some one near threw a stone, whereupon one of the regular soldiers came into his garden and killed him by cutting his head open. `[At the coroner's inquest a verdict of Wilful Murder was returned but no one was brought to trial (see H.O. , 42. 162).]` The marchers were not all stopped near Stockport. Some four or five hundred straggled into Macclesfield tired and footsore. `[H.O., 42. 162.]` Five hundred were said to have got as far as Leek, but as they marched on towards Derby they found the Hanging Bridge over the river Dove near Ashborne occupied by yeomanry, who expected some thirty thousand men to march upon them. Most turned back, some twenty-five were taken into custody. `[Ibid., 42. 161.]` A few, in spite of the force at the Hanging Bridge, got as far as Derby whence they were persuaded to return, some were said to have reached Loughborough; `[Ibid., 42. 162.]` one, at any rate, Abel Couldwell of Stalybridge, reached London and presented his petition to Lord Sidmouth for the Prince Regent on March 18. `[Ibid., 42. 163.]`

The 'knapsack' prisoners, as they were called, were a serious embarrassment to the magistrates, and the prospect of the arrival of twenty-five more sent back by the magistrates of Staffordshire and Derbyshire was not greeted with enthusiasm. 'They might have made cases of Vagrancy very well against them in Staffordshire and Derby,' wrote Mr. Lloyd of Stockport, who was playing a zealous part in the affair, 'and,' he adds, 'it may be running no risque to have them convicted in acts of Vagrancy here.' `[H.O., 42. 161.]` Not only were the prisons already overcrowded, but awkward questions as to the legality of the arrests began to be asked. The Home Office advised on March 5 that those who were deluded by others and were now contrite should be set free. `[Secret Letter Book, H.O., 79. 3.]` The magistrates acted on this advice, but there were some who were not contrite; what was to be done with them? Five at least were such stubborn Britons that they refused to find sureties, declaring they had done nothing wrong. One of them, George Grimshaw, would not allow his employer to offer bail; another, Thomas Leigh, a boy of seventeen, was 'very obstinate in maintaining the Propriety of his Conduct,' and would not let his friends give bail. These five with four others were committed for trial at the August Assizes. `[H.O., 42. 162.]` Mr. Evans thought some prosecutions for misdemeanour essential otherwise actions might be begun against the magistrates and municipal officers. It might indeed be desirable to be provided with certioraries?? for removing the cases into the King's Bench at the discretion of the gentleman who may be employed as counsel,' though if the case could be brought to trial with a strong expectation of conviction it would be very beneficial 'for the Jury of this County who feel the situation which we are in will I apprehend not be indisposed so far as is fairly consistent with the Merits of the case.' `[Ibid., 42. 165.]`

It is worth while to record what the prisoners themselves, whose conviction was to be so beneficial, were thinking as they lay week after week in prison. In May they sent a letter written by one of them, William Wood, to Lord Sidmouth: `[Ibid.]`

'In behalf of Myself and fellow Prisoners, 8 in number, who humbly crave your Assistance, in our present Distress, we was taken by the Military and Civil Powers on Monday, March 10th last, nearly at Noontide, betwixt Manchester and Stockport, on our Journey for London with an Intent of presenting a Petition to the Prince Regent, for a redress of our Grievances which was dreadfull in the extreme, our Familys being nearly in a state of Starvation, and haveing no means of paying our Rent, and nearly Naked, as such we thought it a duty incumbant there was upwards of Two Hundred Persons taken that Day, and Lodged in the New Bailey Manchester the rest was Liberated, in a few Days, excepting Nine as mention'd above, we was detained in the Lockups, five of us Nine Days and Nights the other four of which I was one 18 Days and Nights with nothing but bare flaggs, to sleep upon, which I found affected my health being nearly 61 Years of Age, when Committed to Lancaster Castle, we was sent in Irons, some of our property was detain'd at the New Bailey, amongst which was a Sum of Money, advanc'd by our Relations and Friends to defray our expences on the Journey, wee made Application to the Governor of this Castle he advised us to Apply to the Magistrates of Manchester, as such we wrote a Petition to them which was presented, by a friend, We did so, and by them order'd to apply to Mr. Nadin Deputy Constable, we apply'd to Mr. Nadin, but he would not deliver the Money. My Lord we hope you will take our case into Consideration and as we trust in your Clemency we rest in hopes we shall not be disapointed, as we do assure your Lordship, we really thought we was doing our duty, as real Friends to the Laws & Constitution of our Country. . . .' `[Mr. Evans' comment on this is the characteristic official assurance that every attention was paid to the prisoners. Since, however, there were only 140 sleeping cells in the prison and there were already 560 prisoners before the conspirators came in, the accommodation was necessarily rough. As for the property, all had been returned except the money collected round the hustings, of which i, 3$. 6d. had been found on Grimshaw, one of the prisoners. It would be interesting to know the ultimate destiny of this money. 20 had also been taken from Bagguley and Drummond.]`

The last incident in the tragic comedy of the Blanketeers is the sending of a confidential letter from the Under-Secretary of State to Mr. Fletcher of Bolton. This letter is fortunately preserved in the Secret Letter Book. `[H.O., 79. 3.]` 'The only Government prosecution at Lancaster,' writes that gentleman, 'is that against a few of the obstinate Blanketeers. It is an extremely difficult case to deal with, and I am very much disposed to think that after the prisoners have sustained about five months Imprisonment it will be more prudent to make a merit of letting them off, than to run the risque of a Verdict after an inflammatory speech of Mr. Brougham or some such Orator.' The eight prisoners were accordingly discharged without trial. `[See petition from Manchester, Hansard, February 9, 1818.]`

We must now return to the day after the Blanketeers had started on their expedition, the 11th March, when the dark plot for a general insurrection at Manchester was first broached. The information obtained by the Government on the subject came from five sources: (1) A certain Michael Hall, alias Dewhurst, known as No. 1; (2) a certain James Rose, known as No. 2: these were both convicts returned from Australia employed by Nadin, and they had for some time been reporting on the doings of the Reform party to the Manchester authorities; (3) 'A. B.,' or Robert Waddington, a weaver of Bolton, who figured in the Luddite business, `[See p. 277.]` but had now for some time been the confidential informant of Colonel Fletcher; (4) an 'informant,' name unknown, employed by Mr. Chippendale of Oldham; (5) William Lomax, a barber, whose position is more difficult to understand.

On the 11th of March Lomax began going round to various persons, with wild talk of factories blazing, and of Manchester becoming a Moscow that very night; amongst others he, or an emissary of his, applied to Bamford, who describes how the Middleton reformers rejected his mad proposals. `[Passages in the Life of a Radical, p. 37.]` Lomax in fact met with no success in his mission; those whom he addressed thought him at best a foolish young man, at worst a spy; but it is not the habit of Englishmen to rush to the police to denounce wild talk, and hence nothing was said to the authorities. On March 17 Lomax wrote up to Lord Sidmouth to inform him as a loyal subject that 'there Egzists a Conspiracy to overturn Government by force of Arms,' and promising to give every information in return for protection. He would like, he adds, to see Sidmouth, but his wife is ill and his clothes are in rags. `[H.O., 42. 164.]` No notice was taken of this letter, and beyond a perfectly futile attempt to induce two men to fire some factories on March 24, `[`Philip's speech, Hansard, February 9, 1818.]` Lomax seems to have engaged in no further operations, nor had he any knowledge of the great plot for a rising on Sunday night, March 30. `[H.O.,42. 164.]`

The credit for this plot must go to No. 1, No. 2, 'A. B.' and Mr. Chippendale's informant, but No. 1 deserves the lion's share. On March 17 there was a gathering of some ten or twelve men at the house of John Lancashire (in Middleton), called for the purpose of collecting money for the men who were already in prison. At this gathering No. 1 was a prominent figure. `[See H.O., 42. 168, for No. 1's account.]` There was a good deal of incoherent and some wild talk, no business was transacted, but another meeting was fixed for the 23rd at Chadderton. Here again the attendance was so small that this meeting was adjourned till the 28th. For the meeting on the 28th, No. 1, No. 2, and 'A. B.' were indefatigable in whipping up recruits, but they only succeeded in procuring an attendance of ten, excluding spies, and one of them, Redeings of Failsworth, had come expressly to protest against suggestions of violence. How far the others were implicated in any wish for violence it is of course impossible to say. We have their word on one side, the spies' word on the other. The only corroborative evidence on the spies' side is that of Richard Flitcroft, one of the men arrested and thrown into prison. After a few weeks of prison he wrote an abject letter `[H.O. 42. 165.]` offering to give information. His information, `[Ibid.]` which describes the meeting on the 17th, shows that there was some wild and futile talk, and that Flitcroft himself had gone as a delegate to Birmingham, but as he had no credentials nobody would listen to him. Bamford, with the self-righteousness that made him unpopular with his associates, thought that they had become compromised by mixing with the spies. `[About as bad a case could be made out against Bamford himself for listening to Lomax or Lomax's emissary without denouncing him, and this Robinson did not fail to point out in the House of Commons (Hansard, March 5, 1818).]` However this may be, the formidable meeting that was to engineer the general rising in Manchester two nights later `[Chippendale's informant went further and said that simultaneous risings were arranged for in Sheffield, Nottingham, Leicester, and Birmingham (H.O., 42. 162).]` was adjourned that same evening, on Dewhurst's suggestion, to the George and Dragon at Ardwick; Dewhurst himself stayed behind, ostensibly to bring over late comers; Waddington went with the ten, `[The movements of No. 2 are uncertain; Philips did not know of him.]` and with them was arrested by the police officers that same night, an inconvenience which Dewhurst managed to escape.

Mr. Hay, who figures largely in these proceedings, which resemble his exploits in saving the State in 1812, was full of activity and excitement that night. 'I feel in a very responsible situation,' he wrote, `[H.O.,42. 162.]` and he dwells on the 'dreadful intentions' and the 'loss of life' imminent but for his preparations. In addition to the men arrested at the actual meeting, a few more dangerous characters were seized, including William Lomax, of whose overtures to Sidmouth the spies were clearly ignorant. 'William Lomax,' wrote Mr. Hay, '... is inclined to give evidence, and has disclosed several circumstances, stating that his intention was to give Evidence, he acknowledges having written to your Lordship.'

The conspirators from the meeting were not a very formidable-looking band. 'All these,' wrote Mr. Hay, 'are miserable objects, but I fear, desperate incendiaries.' `[H.O., 42. 164.]` Lomax and Waddington (alias A. B.) were released next day. Lomax died soon after; `[He was dead by November (H.O., 42. 171).]` Waddington's career as a spy was cut short by his unfortunate arrest. A certain awkwardness arose in his case for, so wrote Mr. Hay, `[H.O.,42. 164.]` Colonel Fletcher had stipulated that he should not be brought forward as a witness, 'but inasmuch as he is now blown upon, he can never again be employed as an informer. Our informer,' `[No. 1.]` he adds proudly, 'stands unsuspected and may be of further use.' The arrests of March 28 were followed by many others under the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, Bamford, Knight, and Benbow being among the victims. No suspicion fell on No. 1 for many months, till November, when Sellars, one of the men whom he had helped to entrap, wrote to his wife from prison saying that Hall had always been ready to treat those without money, and had proposed the change in the place of meeting on March 28. This of course cannot be true, says the borough-reeve naively, `[H.O.,42. 171.]` since the instructions given to No. 1 and No. 2 from the very first were, not to push forward the plans of reformers, but only to engage so far as was necessary to discovery under pain of dismissal. However, Hall was now suspected, a distinction he shared, it may be mentioned, with most of the genuine working-class reformers, and it was thought wiser to remove him from Manchester before the prisoners returned. `[H.O., 42. 1.71, and 79. 3. After Dewhurst's and Lomax's doings were unmasked by Mr. Philips, February 9, 1818, the Government (F. Robinson) on March 9 declared that no man of the name of Dewhurst was known to Govern- ment. It was true that he was not known under that name, but on February 13 Mr. Hay had written * Most private. We consider that by Dewhurst is meant No. I' (H. O., 42. 174).]`

No. 2 was not suspected till later, but according to the Manchester Observer of March 7, 1818, `[H.O., 42. 175.]` where he is called Roe, both he and No. 1 had fled by that date. His last contribution to the great plot was to hold a meeting on March 31, after the arrests, with five notorious characters and to decide that it was useless to attempt a general insurrection since the military force was too strong. `[H.O., 42. 165.]` The great Manchester plot was in fact over, and we now come to the more extended operations connected with the name of Oliver, operations compared with which the achievements of No. 1 and No. 2 are reduced to very slight proportions. Mr. Oliver, alias W. J. Richards, was described by an acquaintance as 'a person of genteel appearance and good address, nearly six feet high, of erect figure, light hair, red and rather large whiskers, and a full face, a little pitted with the small-pox. His usual dress . . . was a light fashionable-coloured brown coat, black waistcoat, dark-blue mixture pantaloons, and Wellington boots.' `[Sir F. Burdett, House of Commons (Hansard, June 16, 1817).]` According to his own account he was born in Shropshire. `[Examination on June 15, 1817 (H.O., 42. 166). The Manchester Courier, March 3, 1818, said that he was a native of South Wales.]` By the time he came into public notice he had already lived thirty years in London, where he pursued the callings of carpenter and builder, and also latterly of surveyor. Business had not prospered with him, and he declared that he had lost a large sum as a builder. The Opposition in the House of Commons afterwards ferreted out some inconvenient details about his past life, `[ Hansard, February II and March 5, 1818.]` such as the fact that he had committed bigamy, and the more relevant story of a rather ugly transaction with a Mr. Restall, formerly his master, a carpenter who accused Oliver of fraud. `[William Smith, in the House of Commons, March 5, 1818, declared himself ready to substantiate charges of gross fraud against Oliver. Mr. Bathurst retorted that the affair alluded to had been referred to arbitration, and that though the arbitrator directed Oliver to pay a sum of money he acquitted him of criminality. Mr. Smith adhered to his story, said the arbitrator was deceived, and asked for an inquiry.]` Oliver's first communication to the Government seems to have been made on March 28, when he brought an unsigned letter to the Home Office requesting an interview. `[H.O., 40. io (Bundle 9).]`

At this time he was mixed up with a certain Pendrill, one of the more violent London reformers, and whether it was for his own safety, as he himself avowed, `[H.O., 42. 1 66.]` or for the sake of gold, that he asked to see Sidmouth and promised communications, is unimportant. His activities in the provinces began on April 23, when he started out for a tour in the North and the Midlands, in company with Mitchell, a hot-headed and unbalanced enthusiast, ostensibly for the purpose of obtaining petitions for Parliamentary Reform. Birmingham, Derby, Sheffield, Wakefield, Huddersfield, Dewsbury, Leeds, Halifax, Royton, Middleton, Manchester, Barnsley, Nottingham were all visited, many of them twice. `[His own time-table is given in H.O., 40. 9. Bennet's history of him, which coincides, though all the dates are not filled up, is in Hansard, February 11, 1818.]` Mitchell was got out of the way by arrest on May 4, `[The arrest took place rather sooner than Oliver intended. See Oliver's own letter, H.O., 40. 10.]` but Oliver's own tour lasted till May 16, when he arrived back in London and consoled his friend Mitchell by paying him several visits in Cold Bath Fields prison. `[Mitchell was afterwards accused of being a spy himself, but there is no evidence of this.]`

During this first tour Oliver wrote reports to the Home Office. `[H.O., 40. 10.]` He is 'obliged to appear as a Liberal patriot,' he writes from Birmingham, and Mitchell believes him sent, he says in another letter from Wakefield, by the London patriots; 'every nerve of mine,' he adds with considerable truth, 'has been at work since I left London.' His task indeed was arduous. To the more staid reformers he represented himself as the friend of Burdett and Cartwright, introducing himself 'with Sir F. Burdett's compliments,' `[When Burdett complained of this, Castlereagh's answer was characteristic: 'If the hon. baronet's name had been mixed up with any of the proceedings of the individuals to whom he had alluded, it was himself that he had to thank for it, and not his Majesty's government' (Hansard, June 19, 1817).]` bent on obtaining a monster petition for Reform, but insinuating that stronger measures might soon be necessary. To the more violent spirits, chafing under the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, he represented himself as delegated by the physical force party in London, where seventy thousand men were ready to rise as soon as plans were matured over the country.

TO DO 

At each town, the other towns were reported to be ready for action, eager to begin the great fight for liberty, provided only that the town he happened to be visiting at the moment would make its arrangements. The object of all these machinations was to gather together recruits, or 'delegates' as he called them, to attend meetings, and he worked hard for this purpose, generally with less success than his exertions deserved. His second and more important mission to the Midlands and the North began on May 23 and ended rather abruptly on June 7, but in that fortnight he achieved a great deal. He was in an even more responsible position now, for he brought with him credentials from the Home Office, in the form of a private letter dated May 22 from Whitehall, to four or five individuals in positions of trust. 'Sir, A Person well acquainted with the Designs of the Disaffected at and other Places in the Midlands and Nothern Counties, will leave London Tomorrow Evening, and will visit previous to his Return. It is possible that he may obtain some Information while at that Place, the early communication of which to a magistrate on the spot may be of material importance. He will accordingly be entrusted with this Letter which he will make use of as his Introduction to you, in case such a Communication should become necessary during his Stay at 'He is an intelligent Man, and deserving of your confidence. I am, &c., J. H. ADDINGTON.' This letter was sent to Mr. Hamper, a magistrate of Birmingham, to the Mayor of Leicester, to Mr. Lockett of Derby, to General Byng, and to Mr. Hay the parson magistrate at Manchester. The secret was kept from other magistrates with embarrassing results. At Sheffield the justices had their own private informant, Thomas Bradley by name, a silver plater. Now Bradley in his reports made such constant mention of the London delegate, Oliver, and of his doings, that the magistrates naturally thought that Oliver's arrest was most desirable. At Sheffield, Oliver had found good if scanty material on which to work, including a certain James Westenholme, who seems to have been whole-hearted in his desire to use any means 'to effect the delivrance of our common country from the greatest Slavery and Despotism.' 2 1 H.O., 42. 165. ibid.

On May 21, Bradley relates 1 that Mr. O , the London delegate, was in Sheffield last Wednesday and agreed that 'the concern' should be put off from May 27 to June 10, and that Oliver recommended that accounts of this postponement should be sent by post to Manchester, Birmingham, and Nottingham. Again on June 3, 2 Bradley deposes that when he went to Wakefield on June 1 at the request of the magistrates, there was much talk about Oliver, the London delegate, and the landlord of the inn asked if Bradley ever doubted that Oliver was a man of good faith, saying, 'x if he is not, I and many more must be hanged.' Bradley goes on to say that on May 28 he was in the company of Oliver in Sheffield and Oliver 'urged Sheffield on,' saying that he could raise seventy thousand men in East London and seventy thousand more in West London. The Sheffield party, he adds, have no other knowledge of the strength and numbers of partisans in Nottingham, Birmingham, and elsewhere, '??? but what they were told by Oliver. Oliver is the Chief Agent and promoter in the business. ??  Elsewhere he states of Oliver, 'He was considered by all the Party as the Man who communicated and directed things from London, and as they directed, so he acted.' 3 The Sheffield justices wishing to nip the plot in the bud went in person, on the information of Bradley, to surprise a secret meeting at the Grinding Wheel on May 29. 4 The conspirators received the alarm and took to their heels, but four men, including Westenholme, were arrested as they came away. Mr. Parker, a Sheffield justice, who communicated with the Home Office, wrote to Lord Sidmouth to describe the arrests, adding casually in a postscript the remark that as he had a full description of Oliver he would, if time allowed, send a constable to take him at Leeds; if missed at Leeds he might be arrested when he went to visit Mitchell in Cold Bath Fields prison. This official zeal caused consternation at headquarters; and in the Secret Letter Book is a copy of the letter Sidmouth wrote to Mr. Parker on May 31. 6 After praising his activity, I must tell you, he proceeds, 'that O. is employed by me, that He is travelling under my directions at this time, and that I have reason to confide in his dis- position and ability to render Himself eminently useful, under 1 H.O., 42. 165. 2 H.O., 42. 163. 1 Bradley, June 6 (H.O., 40. 10). * H.O., 42. 165. H.O., 79- 3- 


present circumstances, I accordingly shall be anxious till I hear again and should be much relieved by hearing that He has not been apprehended.' 'It was purely accidental,' wrote Mr. Parker in return, 1 4 that Oliver did not fall into our hands at Sheffield, and from a letter yesterday from the Mayor at Leeds I find he had a similar escape there.' He added that the persons engaged in the affair in Sheffield were 'of the lowest order and not so numerous as I stated in my letter of the 31 st Ult .' The number then suggested as a maximum was 230, calculated on the unlikely supposition that each man who came to meetings had ten others behind him. 2 Mr. Parker was a second time rather too energetic to allow the plans to ripen properly. Oliver, as we have said, worked indefatigably to gather meetings of so-called 'delegates' from different places together. He had contrived one such meeting at Wakefield on May 5, another at Mill Bridge near Wakefield on May 11, and he was now busily engaged arranging for a third at Thornhill Lees on June 6. He spared no pains to obtain a good attendance. He did his best to get a delegate from Birmingham, even sending over Crabtree, a foolish young man who had entered heart and soul into his schemes, to persuade one of the members of the Reform party to come, but his efforts were useless. 3 Manchester was equally cold, and Oliver expended his eloquence there in vain. 4 The only persons, in fact, whom he managed to collect at his meeting on June 6 at the Sportsman's Arms, Thornhill Lees, were ten obscure individuals from Leeds, Bradford, Wakefield, and the surrounding districts. 6 The attempts in this part of the world, wrote 1 H.O., 42. 166. 2 H.O., 42. 165. 3 Mr. Jones, a respectable jeweller in Birmingham, head of the Reform party there, had been one of the first people seen by Oliver on his former mission. Rather reluctantly a delegate had been sent from Birmingham to the meeting at Wakefield on May 5, but finding that instead of petitions physical force was discussed, the Birmingham reformers had no more to do with Oliver's schemes (see Bennet's speech, Hansard, February n, 1818). * On June 4 General Byng wrote that he heard that Manchester had given up the rising as hopeless, and that Oliver who had just come from Manchester corroborated this information (H.O., 42. 166). All the inflammable material had already been used up by No. i and No. 2 and A. B. Prentice, op fit., pp. 108-9, sa Y s that a small band of middle-class reformers in Manchester had exposed the spy system too thoroughly for Oliver to get any footing (cf. Prentice, op fit., p. III). 6 H.O., 42. 1 66. 

General Byng on June 4, 1 after seeing Oliver, will be decided on at a meeting of delegates next Friday, 'which He will attend, and then see me, and immediately afterwards proceed to Birmingham....' It is clear that Oliver had not meant these delegates to be arrested that day, nor did General Byng wish it. Byng wrote 2 that as Mr. Parker, after a meeting of magistrates, proposed arrest, he could not very well object, but he accompanied the magistrates and yeomen in person to give aid, and 'that I might take Care and dispose of the Person introduced to me by your Brother, who I knew was to be there.' 'The Person I alluded to,' he adds later, 'I was forced to seize upon, but I contrived his escape and sent him off by the Mail tonight for Nottingham and Birmingham, from whence he proceeds to town.' This slight incident was to have very important consequences. The ten dangerous delegates safe in prison, Oliver went on his way to Nottingham. 3 Oliver's first visit to Nottingham was on May 15, just at the end of his first tour; his second visit was on May 26, when he stayed till the 28th visiting the villages round; his third visit, when he came from Thornhill Lees, was on June 6. At Nottingham he found an enthusiast ready to fall in and forward any pro- posal however wild, in the person of Jeremiah Brandreth, a half-starved, illiterate, and unemployed frame-work knitter, 4 of swarthy and what is commonly called 'foreign' appearance. Probably he had a strain of gipsy blood. Brandreth, to whom leadership and excitement were attractive, entered heart and soul into the scheme. On May 23 Mr. Enfield's secret agent reports 5 that Brandreth came to see him and talked of the 'general strike' to take place in London, Manchester, Sheffield, Derby, Nottingham, Leicester, Yorkshire, and other places the following Sunday or the Sunday after. Part of the plan was to seize soldiers' arms wherever they could get them, to march together to London, and in London to contend for a change in Government. On May 25 he reports 6 a meeting at Brandreth's house in the morning of five persons, 1 H.O.,42. 1 66. 2 Ibid. 3 In the case of Nottingham, as of Sheffield, there are reports from another 'secret agent' employed by the local authorities and ignorant of Oliver's position. 4 He was receiving parish relief at the time, and with his family had been 'removed' from Sutton Ashfield to Wilford (see Trials of Brandreth and Others, vol. i. p. 211). 5 H.O., 42. 165. 6 Ibid, 


when there was a good deal of incoherent conversation about the Brunswick family, the people's cause and pikes. Another meeting took place at the Three Salmons the same afternoon, of the same persons joined by five others, including a delegate from Bradford, identified in the margin by the Home Office authorities as Crabtree. 1 This delegate discoursed, after Oliver's fashion, on the theme that it had been resolved to petition no more but to arm themselves, and a vague discussion followed on the time of the rising and the Brunswick family and the expectation that the London delegate would come next Tuesday. There are no more reports from Nottingham till June 5,  ?? by which time plans had matured, and Brandreth had been given, or had assumed, the command of the contingent from Pentridge in Derby which was to march out and join the other forces at Nottingham. Brandreth told the Nottingham secret agent that the London delegate was well known. ?? I asked him if they had any communication with any other person than the London Delegate. He said they had not but some of the Chaps had.' Birmingham, where they had trusty friends, was to send a delegate. From other sources the secret agent learned that arms were expected from London, that the London delegate was to visit Nottingham shortly, that the rising was fixed for Monday night, June 9, when Mansfield and Sutton were to rise at 9 P.M., Bulwell at 10 o'clock, Nottingham at 11 o'clock, whilst the London delegate was to go to Chesterfield, Sheffield, Leeds, Man- chester, Liverpool, Derby, Leicester, Birmingham, London, and then back to Nottingham. Next day, June 6, the secret agent reported 8 that the villages of Arnold and Bulwell, which he had been asked to rouse, refused to take part in the plan; that refusals to join came from many quarters, but that all was said to be ready for action on Tuesday at Birmingham, where Jones the jeweller was to head the rising. Those who were not killed were to be put in a coal pit. We now come to Oliver's arrival in Nottingham on June 6, 4 fresh from Thornhill Lees and from his interview with General Byng. He brought word that they were to begin -at Sheffield, Huddersfield, Wakefield, and Leeds on Sunday the 8th, and the Nottingham people decided that their operations should begin on Monday the 9th and sent word to Derby and Birmingham to that effect. But now a curious situation arose. 1 H.O., 42. 165. a H.O., 42. 166. Ibid. Ibid. 

News had reached Nottingham of the Thornhill Lees arrests and of Oliver's strange escape. One of the small band at Nottingham, Holmes by name, began to suspect Oliver, or Hollis as he now called himself. Was he perhaps a traitor in disguise? Would it be as well to decoy him into the fields and there shoot him? Some favoured this policy, others opposed it. Finally a meeting was held at the Punch Bowl of about twenty persons, and Oliver was subjected to perhaps the most searching ordeal he ever had to face. He must have been a man of considerable nerve, for he stood the cross-examination well, declared, what was after all the truth, that he was an ex-builder paid by a mysterious friend to travel about in the cause of Reform, and persuaded them also the truth that his activities were essential to the success of the scheme. They let him go and he returned to London, visiting Birmingham again on his way, where, as was suitable to the type of reformers he visited there, he made free use of the names of Burdett and Cartwright. 2 When he reached London his part in the rising was over. It only remained for the rising itself to take place. The story of this rising which was to embrace the North and the Midlands is soon told. In only two places were there persons foolish enough to translate words into action, first at Huddersfield, and secondly in the Derbyshire villages round Pentridge. At Huddersfield, Sheffield, Wakefield, and Leeds the rising as has been said was to begin on Sunday night, June 8. 3 On Sunday night a mob gathered at Huddersfield, demanded arms at several houses, met six of the yeomanry at the bridge, exchanged shots and forced the yeomanry to retire. When, however, the yeomen came back in stronger force the mob was gone, and the rising, so far as the West Riding was concerned, was over, though a few of the so- called insurgents were recognised and arrested. 4 That Sunday Brandreth was sitting in a public-house at Pentridge discoursing very openly of his plans to an audience, 1 H.O., 42. 166. 2 Bennet's speech, Hansard, February n, 1818. 8 H.O., 42. 166. Byng writes on June 10 from Wakefield: I want to find out 'why the Rising was not attempted last night, for of the intention there cannot be a doubt.' 4 See Fitzwilliam's letter of June 17, H.O., 42. 167. Also see H.O., 42. 1 66 (Briefs of Evidence). 


which included two special constables, who were so far from taking him seriously that they contented themselves with mild remonstrances. Brandreth and his friends threatened to put them up the chimney if they were not quiet. Brandreth recited some verses, probably of his own composition: 'Every man his skill must try, He must turn out and not deny; No bloody soldier must he dread, He must turn out and fight for bread. The time is come, you plainly see The Government opposed must be.' l It is possible that in spite of his enthusiasm Brandreth would have obtained no following had not local indignation been stirred by the fact that some men from Mr. Jessop's foundry at Butterley had been discharged on the Saturday night ?? in consequence of their Jacobinical principles, and calling themselves Members of an Hampden Club.' 2 As it was, a small number of workmen, at the most two hundred, prob- ably fewer, from Pentridge, Wingfield, and Ripley were induced to join in a march towards Nottingham. Some thought that when they got to Nottingham there would be plenty of rum and a hundred guineas, 8 others more vague 'wanted a bigger loaf and the times altering,' 4 and they all thought that something important was happening every- where else. England, Ireland, and France, said one enthusiast, would rise that night at 10 o'clock, and there was much talk of a 'cloud of men' sweeping down from the North and carrying all before them. 6 Encouragement indeed was needed, for the rain poured down, it was fourteen miles to Nottingham, and the expected reinforcements were nowhere to be seen. At Nottingham that night there was a good deal of agitation in the streets not an unusual occurrence in that town and about one hundred men were said to have gathered on the racecourse, but nothing more happened. On their way the Pentridge party stopped at nine or ten houses and demanded arms, and in some cases forced a man from the house to go with them. The insurgents were armed in motley fashion, mostly with what witnesses afterwards called * spikes' or 1 Trials, vol. i. pp. 75 f. 8 See letter from Derby Post Office, June n (H.O., 42. 166). 3 Trials , vol. i. p. 78. 4 Ibid., vol. i. p. 113. 8 Ibid., vol. i. p. 87. 

1 'sticks with things in them,' though the Government preferred to describe them as 'pikes.' There was one act of violence. At the house of a Mr. Hepworth, Brandreth, in his wild excitement, shot and killed a manservant. There is nothing to show that the deed was intentional, but firing through windows to impress the people within is a dangerous game to play. With dwindling numbers and sinking spirits the rebels marched on in the early morning hours as far as Eastwood on their way to Nottingham. There at about 6 A.M. they met two magistrates who had come out with eighteen men of the 15th Light Dragoons and two officers to oppose them. What happened is best described by one of the magistrates, Mr. Mundy: 1 '... about a mile before we reached East- wood we came in sight of the mob who though at near three quarters of a miles distance from us no sooner saw the Troops than they fled in all directions dispersing over the fields and throwing away their arms they were pursued for a considerable time and finally driven out of this County into Derbyshire . . . they did not fire a single shot and seemed only intent on escape.' Some were captured at once, others were beaten out of the woods and hedges like pheasants; in all about forty-eight were taken. 2 Never was war levied against the King in more spiritless fashion. Hitherto to those ignorant of the part played by Oliver, the outbursts, however futile in themselves, might seem signs of a grave state of affairs, but on June 14 the most sensational revelation that ever newspaper published appeared in the second edition of the Leeds Mercury, on the subject of Oliver and his share in the late disturbances: a revelation that caused a profound change in public opinion. It so happened that amongst the persons with whom Oliver had got into touch were Mr. Willans a bookseller of Dewsbury, and Mr. John Dickenson a linen-draper of the same town, both members of the local Reform party. Oliver had come several times to Mr. Willans' house, where Mr. Dickenson had seen him, but Mr. Willans had grown suspicious of Oliver's hints about the need for employing force, and had 1 H. O., 42. 166, June 10. 2 H.O., 42. 166 and 167. Brandreth escaped at first, and after vain attempts to obtain a passage to America from Bristol sought refuge in the 'secret agents' bouse in Nottingham where he was taken (July 22, H.O., 42. 168). 


ceased communications with him, thinking him a dangerous fellow. On the morning of the meeting at Thornhill Lees, Oliver had come not once but twice to Mr. Willans' shop to press him to attend the meeting as a delegate from Dewsbury. His friends in London, he told Mr. Willans, 'were almost heartbroken that the people in the country were so quiet.' Mr. Willans, however, refused. Later in the day, after the arrest of the delegates, Mr. Dickenson chanced to be in an inn at Wakefield and there to his surprise he -saw Oliver, and asked him how it was that he had escaped when all the other reformers had been seized at the Thornhill Lees meeting. Oliver was hard put to it, and could only give the lame reply that no papers had been found on him. Mr. Dickenson knew enough of the ways of justice to think this a very insufficient explanation of Oliver's escape, and his suspicions were at once aroused. Unfortunately for Oliver, Dickenson was the witness a few moments later of an incident that turned his suspicions of Oliver's real character into conviction. For a manservant in livery came up to speak to Oliver and as he came to him he touched his hat. Dickenson making inquiries found that the man was the servant of General Byng and had driven Oliver in a tandem from his master's house to catch the coach. Dickenson and Willans put these facts before the Leeds Mercury, which published them with a strong article demanding an explanation of Oliver's position, and declaring him to be 'a green bag maker.' l This article saved Oliver's Yorkshire victims. It caused great excitement, and everywhere the reformers began to put two and two together and to reconstruct the story of Oliver's operations. On the 16th Mr. Dickenson and Mr. Willans attended before the magistrates to lay charges against Oliver. 2 On the 17th Fitzwilliam sent an important letter to the Government, round which controversy afterwards raged. 3 1 See also Leeds Mercury for June 21, 28, July 5, 12, 19, etc. 'I believe the Leeds Mercury has done much more harm to the political morals (if I may allow the term) of the labouring classes in this part than ever Tom Paine's trash did it is a most villainous publication' (Correspondent to dome Office, February 1818, H.O., 42. 174). 2 Mr. Dickenson's deposition was taken (H.O., 42. 1 66, June 1 6). Mr. Willans could not be heard because though not yet formally admitted as a Quaker he had conscientious scruples against taking an oath (H.O., 42. 167, June 17). 3 See p. 373 below. 

After giving particulars of the Willans and Dickenson revelations he wrote: 'There certainly is very generally in the Country a strong and decided opinion that most of the events that have recently occurred in the Country are to be attributed to the presence and active agitation of Mr. Oliver. He is considered as the main spring, from which every movement has taken its rise. All the mischievous in the country have considered themselves as subordinate Members of a great leading Body of Revolutionists in London, as co-operating with that Body for one general purpose, in this view to be under its Instructions and Directions communicated by some Delegate appointed for the purpose. Had not then a person, pretending to come from that Body, and for that purpose, made his appearance in the Country, it is not assuming too much to say that probably no movement whatever would have occurred. It does not follow that a dangerous spirit could not have been found lurking in any Breast, but that that Spirit would not have found its way into action.' He then gives his opinion as to recent occurrences: 'First then at Sheffield it appears that when the Delegate from London had made his appearance and sanctioned by his approbation the measures taken there, and had urged them to press forward and not to be more backward in preparation than other places, when therefore a Meeting of Delegates or Leaders of Tens was summoned for the important purpose of finally arranging matters for a Rising, and the consequent measures of operation, eighteen Leaders only, with four excuses, were present.' Again, when the grand effort in the Manufacturing District was made Sunday June 8th when actual Insurrection was resorted to; when the Insurgents came out in Battle Array, took post at the Bridge near Huddersfield, and had their Sentries at their Outposts, who brought prisoners, or attempted to do so, to Head Quarters, they are not reported to have exceeded a few Hundreds; and such appeared their want of order, or their want of Arms, that having come into Contact with Six Yeomen upon whom they fired, and forced back, nevertheless in less than an hour, on the return of the Yeomen in force, not a Vestige of a Body, or even of a Man in Arms, was to be found.'?? The revelations of the Leeds Mercury had an immediate effect on the treatment of the prisoners in Yorkshire. Of 1 H.O., 42. 167, June 17. Sidmouth wrote in answer to Fitzwilliam's letter and Dickenson's declaration: 'The Statement is to me incredible but I think it so important as to require immediate and minute Investigation' (H.O., 42. 167). The only investigation, so far as one can judge, was an examination of 'the Person known by the name of W. J. Richards' by Home Office officials on June 15 (H.O., 42. 166).


the ten Thornhill Lees delegates, met to arrange the final plans for the rising, two were sent up to London under warrants from the Government. 1 The magistrates discharged seven others on their own recognisances or on bail, and detained one in hopes of further evidence. 2 The prosecution of the Huddersfield rioters had been even more of a fiasco. Here Fitzwilliam's influence was clearly shown. On June 23 he writes 3 that he has recommended the magistrates not to try to procure further evidence against others from the prisoners; he dislikes the evidence of accomplices and there is no hope of getting * witnesses less objectionable.' It is better to restore public confidence and not leave every one with the uneasy feeling that they may be arrested. In spite of this the Government solicitor (Wm. Le Blanc) hoped to obtain capital convictions against six men for shooting at a constable and against eight men for burglary of arms. 4 He had reckoned without the Judge, Mr. Baron Wood, who shared Fitzwilliam's dislike of accomplices' evidence. The prisoners charged with burglary were all acquitted; for the Judge treated the evidence of accomplices as valueless unless confirmed, and the only confirmation came from a woman who happened also to have told some people that she knew no persons implicated. After the summing up the jury could not fail to acquit. The riot charges were dropped when it was seen how the Judge treated such evidence. Next day (July 26) the prosecution met with no better fortune in their charges connected with the shooting of the constable. 5 Here again the only witnesses for the Crown were accomplices, and one of these was, according to the prosecution, tampered with, and so told the Grand Jury that the yeomen fired first when he ought to have said the mob fired first. According to his own story 8 what he said was true, but the prosecution had tried to bribe him by Is. worth of oranges to say that the mob fired first. However that might be, he was rendered useless, and grave doubt being thrown by the Judge on the truthfulness of the other witness, here again the prisoners were all acquitted. 7 1 H.O., 42. 166. 2 H.O.,42. 167. Ibid. 4 H.O.,42. 169. 5 The Grand Jury had thrown out a bill for firing at the constable, bat found a true bill for rioting and abetting in the shooting. 8 See Sherwin's Political Register, August 9, 1817 (H.O., 42. 170). 7 The Government in June had met with another disagreeable check- Watson, Preston, Thistlewood, and Hooper were all arraigned for High 

' How little do those who triumph on such occasions, see that the Jurors neglect of his oath has a direct Tendancy to the subversion of a Public Liberty.' So wrote an official of the Home Office on Lord Sidmouth's behalf to Mr. Fletcher of Bolton after the verdicts. 1 The comments of the Annual Register form an interesting contrast: 'Against all this weight of power and influence, seconded by the public purse, a few obscure men and boys, principally in the very lowest ranks of society, had to defend themselves. The odds were terrific; but with the zeal and intelligence of their professional advisers and advocates, and the presiding presence of a righteous Judge, who knows no distinction between the lofty and the humble in the administration of justice, the trial by jury obtained another distinguished triumph, and the prisoners after a period of deep anxiety were restored to their liberty and to their friends.' 2 The prisoners at Derby were to meet with a less happy fate. There was no Fitzwilliam in Derbyshire, and they were not tried before Baron Wood. A repetition of the fiasco at York had to be avoided by the Government, and some careful stage-management was needed. A Special Commission with four Judges was issued and the prisoners were charged, not with such simple counts as burglary or shooting, but with High Treason itself. Mr. Lockett, solicitor of Derby, who helped prepare the cases for the Crown, wrote that it would not do to have the trials before the harvest was over, for 'we shall want at least 400 common Jurors from parts of the county in which crops are backward, and if they have to come before crops are nearly housed, they will make every possible excuse, and come, if obliged, with reluctance, and out of humour. This temper would be prejudicial to us.' 3 He adds advice, which was taken, to brief Mr. John Balguy for the Crown, for he is popular with Derbyshire juries and might be briefed for the other side; advice reiterated by Mr. Mundy, J.P., who added: * As it will be necessary in selecting the jury to avoid those parts of the County that border on Nottinghamshire, as Treason in London. The Government case rested on an accomplice, Castles; the jury acquitted Watson, and in consequence the Crown dropped the other Prosecutions. 1 H.O., 79. 3, August 9. a Annual Register, 1817, Chronicle, p. 73. 1 H.O., 42. 169, August II. 


also those parts in which the insurrection broke out, and also those parts that are much connected with Manchester, the summoning the jury will of course fall heavily on the other parts.' 1 Mr. Lockett afterwards came in for a good deal of criticism for having acted as if he were under sheriff as well as solicitor to the Crown, by using his influence with the under sheriff to name and pack juries. 2 The criticism would have been strengthened had his critics seen his letter to the Home Office on October II: a 'I am happy to inform you that we are prepared for the trials. I have intelligence upon which I can depend as to every Juror. The list throughout is most respectable. There will be but few challenges on the part of the Crown.' For four months, till the harvest was over and suitable jurors were ready to try them, the prisoners lay in gaol. They had some friends, among them Joseph Strutt, the curate of Pentridge named Wolstonholme,* and a Presbyterian clergy- man, Mr. Higginson; and a solicitor was engaged for their defence. Their solicitor wrote after they had been eight weeks in prison to ask if they were not 'intitled to some other allowance as state prisoners besides Bread and Water, on which alone the greater part of them are now subsisting; not having the means of procuring any thing better or more substantial.' The answer given was that the prisoners were to have an allowance 'adapted to the Situation in life and the ordinary mode of living of the respective Prisoners.' 6 Mr. John Cross and 1 H.O., 42. 169, August 23. 2 H.O., 42. 173. On July 24 (H.O., 42. 168) he writes up to say that as the Derby gaol is overcrowded and insecure he has ordered Brandreth to be ironed and asks to be authorised to iron the other High Treason prisoners. 8 H.O., 42. 170. 4 H.O., 42. 171. Joseph Strutt, manufacturer, was third son of Jedediah Strutt of Derby-rib machine fame. Joseph was a patron of art and literature; for his princely liberality to the town, see Felkin, op. cit., p. 100. Lockett wanted to have Wolstonholme arrested on the general charge of treasonable practices, and he wrote to the Home Office pointing out that it was undesirable to confine him in the Derby prison where he might get into communication with the other prisoners. The Attorney-General evidently thought that Wolstonholme might be able to defend himself and that a general charge would be risky. Lockett accused Wolstonholme of sheltering Weightman. Wolstonholme was a man of great courage and independence. His licence, so Lockett wrote, enabled him to 'bid defiance to the loyal party.' Lockett hoped some- thing might be done by pressure from Sidmouth on Wolstonholme's bishop (H.O., 42. 170 and 172). 5 H.O., 42. 169, August 9. 

Mr. Thomas Denman were counsel for the prisoners. Much clearly turned on the question whether Oliver's doings could be kept out of the proceedings. The suggestion that Crabtree should be tried or used as a witness was soon vetoed by Mr. Lockett. 1 'I do not want Crabtree. He will let in Oliver's proceedings upon us. We will confine ourselves to the Derbyshire traitors if you please.' When the trials began it looked as if it might prove impossible to keep Oliver out altogether. 'Oliver must come to be produced in court if necessary,' wrote Mr. Litchfield, the Treasury solicitor; 2 'please send him at once with Raven, disguised and under the name of Maule to the George Inn.' Oliver came, but his services were not required. Mr. Litchfield frankly describes the line pursued by the prosecution, 'avoiding all questions about , and not ever giving them an opportunity of introducing his name.' 3 A few days later they decided to send Oliver back, for 'we have resolved not to bring forward any prosecution in which his name can be brought in question. 4 Five-and-thirty traitors 6 were brought up for trial on October 16, 1817, charged by a stroke of grim irony with having been 'moved and seduced by the instigation of the devil' to levy war against the King, and to compass to depose him. The case of Brandreth was taken first. Evidence as to his actions on June 8 and 9 was clear and conclusive. The defence tried to show that what had happened was a riot, not treason. Could the jury say that 'the five and thirty miserable paupers . . . arraigned here did levy war against the King?' The jury instructed by the Judge saw nothing grotesque in so deciding, and Brandreth was found guilty. 'A crime is not less a crime,' said Lord Chief Baron Richards in summing up, 'because the man who commits it is poor.' After Brandreth's conviction the other cases were taken one by one and the evidence given again with wearisome repetition. First, William Turner a stone mason, formerly a soldier, was tried and found guilty; second, Isaac Ludlam the elder, also a stone mason; third, 1 H.O., 42. 169, August ii. 2 H.O., 42. 171, October 15. * H.O., 42. 171, October 19. 4 H.O., 42. 171, October 22. Oliver's journey to Derby had become known* and particulars were published in the papers causing considerable sensation. 8 Forty-six were indicted on July 26. The charges against eleven were evidently dropped. 


George Weightman a sawyer. Denman pressed inconvenient questions as to the motive for drawing a veil over everything that had occurred before June 8, but he received no answer. He employed all the arts of his eloquence to persuade the jury that the others were merely led on by Brandreth whose influence, 'the influence of an eye like no eye that I ever beheld before,' he magnified until he was even led to quote the description of Conrad in Byron's Corsair as a portrait of Brandreth, beginning: 'Who is that chief? his name on every shore Is famed and feared; they ask, and know no more.' l When it came to George Weightman's case, his counsel merely asked for mercy without attempting any defence. 4 Here,' wrote the Postmaster of Derby to the General Post Office in London, 'the finger of Providence was perceptable for upon this Jury one Endsor of Parwick had got in who would if his word is to be taken have starved the whole sooner than have found him guilty.' As it was, he adds, it was difficult to persuade Endsor to acquiesce in the verdict of guilty with which however a strong recommendation to mercy was joined. 2 The prosecution meanwhile was hoping for overtures from the prisoners' representatives seeing that 'each case as we proceed will be gradually weaker.' 3 These overtures were made. As a result the charges were dropped against twelve of the younger prisoners and they were set free, whilst the remaining nineteen pleaded guilty and received formal sentence of death. One of them, Thomas Bacon, had been much associated with Oliver and had acted as a delegate at meetings arranged by him. His name came first in the original indictments, but his determination to plead that he was Oliver's dupe ensured the postponement of his trial. 4 'Old Bacon,' wrote a correspondent from Derby during the trials, 'has been telling the prisoners they are not tried by their Peers, but by men of property. I name this to show you what dreadful principles these men have taught their unfortunate children.' 5 1 The tone of Brandreth's last letter with its pitiful prayer, 'A Prayer in trobel of Sin,' and his adjurations to his wife remind the reader of a local preacher rather than a Corsair (H.O., 42. 171). 8 H.O., 42. 171, October 25. 3 H.O., 42. 171, October 23. * H.O., 42. 170, September 2. 8 H.O., 42. 171, October 21. 2A 

Including the four tried at the beginning there were twenty- three men found guilty of High Treason. 'Your object was to wade through the blood of your Countrymen, to extinguish the Law and the constitution of your Country, and to sacrifice the property, the liberties, and the lives of your fellow subjects, to confusion and anarchy and the most complete tyranny. God be praised, your purpose failed.' 1 Six of the prisoners had their death sentence commuted to various terms of imprisonment, three were transported for fourteen years, eleven, including Thomas Bacon and George Weightman, were transported for life. 2 Jeremiah Brandreth, William Turner, and Isaac Ludlam were left for execution. On Friday, November 7, 1817, they were drawn on a hurdle round the yard in front of the felons and debtors, hanged on a platform in front of the gaol till they were dead, and their heads severed from their bodies. The rest of the sentence as to quartering was graciously remitted by the Prince Regent. 'God bless you all and Lord Castlereagh too,' said Brandreth. 'I pray God to bless you all, and the King upon his Throne,' said Isaac Ludlam, but William Turner, in a manner described by Mr. Lockett as * malignant and deceitful,' uttered as his last words, 'This is the work of Government and Oliver.' 8 This declaration created a painful impression, which even the chaplain's certificate that neither Ludlam nor Turner had ever seen Oliver or heard of him at meetings failed to dispel. 4 Mr. Enfield, the Town Clerk, and Mr. Carpenter- Smith, who was on the committee that managed the police at Nottingham, asked that they might see Oliver's state- ments in order to answer the questions put to them as to the truth of Turner's assertion. 5 'Lord Sidmouth,' ran the letter in answer to this application, 'would have great satisfaction in complying with the Request of those respectable Gentlemen if he could do so consistently with His Public Duty but at this period when it is the Wish of H.M.'s Government to throw a Veil over the Scenes of Turbulence which have passed; His Lordship deems it impolitic to extend the Knowledge of Oliver's statements which (as you are 1 Lord Chief Baron Richards in passing sentence. 2 Twenty years later, when a Whig Government was in power, Prentice started a successful agitation for their return (Prentice, op ctt., p. 112). 8 H.O., 42. 171, November 7. 4 Oliver, of course, dealt with the principals, Brandreth and Bacon. 8 H.O., 42. 172, December 13. 


aware) relate to a great Variety of Facts and implicate a large Number of Persons not connected with the Counties of Derby and Nottingham, and convey much Information unnecessary for the Object which Mr. Enfield and Mr. Smith have in view.' * Oliver's career is important in history because these methods of government were rapidly growing into a system. Probably no English Government has ever been quite so near, in spirit and licence, to the atmosphere that we used to associate with the Tsar's government of Russia as the Government that ruled England for the first few years of the peace. Oliver's adventures were the most daring example of methods that had become habitual in the treatment of the poor by several magistrates, but the employment of spies, and of the kind of spies that pass readily into agents provocateurs, had become very common in the last few years, as part of the political system; Tierney declared in 1818 that there was no subject that demanded the attention of Parliament so urgently. The system was checked by two forces: the independence of the London juries and the protests of the Whigs in Parliament. No writer on the subject of this volume is likely to run into a dangerous enthusiasm over the conduct and achievements of the Whig party as a whole, but it is clear that it was the rally of the Opposition to the call of Bennet and Philips that scared Castlereagh and Sidmouth and successive Governments from developing these practices. The debates of 1818 on the demand for an inquiry into Oliver's conduct, though they ended as all party debates end, displayed a spirit and excited a spirit that made Governments more cautious in the future. 2 The Whigs were in many respects as indifferent to the claims and conditions of the working classes as the Tories, but they had preserved the tradition of the Englishman's way of looking at this particular species of injustice. Men like Fitzwilliam, Grosvenor, Tierney, and Althorp, though they had 1 H.O., 79. 3, December 17. a There were debates in the House of Commons on February n and March 6, 1818, on motions for inquiry. On the first occasion the motion was rejected by in votes to 52; on the second by 162 to 69. There was a debate in the House of Lords on February 18 on the grievances of the Habeas Corpus prisoners which took largely the character of a debate on espionage. The motion was negatived without a division. The Opposition were exceedingly active in both Houses throughout the months of February and March. 

the general point of view of their class, had a sense of honour that was revolted by the spectacle of wretched and ignorant men tempted to their ruin in some wild scheme by a Government spy. Moreover as politicians, they saw the dangers of such a system; as it was, a Government that wanted an excuse for suspending the Habeas Corpus Act had found the machinations of their spies a most convenient pretext, and it was obvious that the temptation to use them deliberately as agents provocateurs might be too much for terrified and unprincipled Ministers. Consequently the men who often had only the support of half a dozen friends when denouncing injustice in Parliament had on this occasion the support of the Opposition. The issue was a simple one. The Government had persuaded Parliament to suspend the Habeas Corpus Act after submitting to Secret Committees a mass of evidence tending to show that the working classes in the North and the Midlands were preparing a rebellion. By the time that Parliament met in 1818 it was known that this report was an absurd exaggeration, a good deal of Oliver's history had come out, and it was everywhere noted that disturbances ceased when he ceased to look for them. There had been the exciting discovery of Dickenson of Dewsbury, and the prompt action of the Leeds Mercury. The middle-class reformers of Manchester, who were by this time a powerful body, had been exasperated by the machinations of the Lancashire spies, and their demand for an inquiry was voiced by Philips, who presented a petition from Manchester merchants and manufacturers on February 9 and made a damaging speech about the Lancashire spies. Meanwhile the facts of Oliver's journeys and conduct had been gradually collected with infinite patience and trouble by the most active of the little set of men who tried to expose and prevent the ill-treatment of the unsheltered classes. Henry Grey Bennet 1 was the John Howard of his day, and his visits to the prisons had taught him a good deal about the spy system. In the House of Commons he defended the poor as the Seventh Beadman in Spenser's holy hospital defended orphans and widows: 1 Bennet (1777-1836), soil of the 4th Earl of Tankerville, and Radical M.P. for Shrewsbury, 1806 and 1811-26, was one of the half-dozen most useful men in Parliament, but by a strange omission he does not find a place in the Dictionary oj National Biography. 


'In face of judgement he their right would plead, Ne ought the powre of mighty men did dread In their defence; nor would for gold or fee Be wonne their rightfull causes downe to tread!' His speech on this occasion 1 was a model of discretion and judgment. The Government's critics had a stronger case than they knew, but even without the conclusive evidence contained in the Home Office Papers they were able to construct an argument that was unanswered because it was unanswerable. 2 The Government's reply only made matters worse. In the House of Lords Sidmouth called Oliver a 'much injured individual.' Lord Holland retorted that he could make out a better case against Oliver than Sidmouth could make out against the people of England from whom he had taken the Habeas Corpus, and Grosvenor promised to bring overwhelming evidence to show that Oliver was at the bottom of the whole business. In the House of Commons 3 Canning cited the first letter written by Fitzwilliam, in December 1816, and omitted to mention the fact that there had been a second letter. This disingenuous conduct provoked a sharp nemesis, for Fitzwilliam's son, Milton, who had felt that as a member of the Secret Committee, he was not at liberty to disclose what had happened at its deliberations, considered that as his father's first letter had been brought into use by the Government it was his right and his duty to tell the full story. It was thus that the House learned that the Government had withheld from the Secret Committee what was perhaps the most important document in their possession. 4 Wilberforce made two unhappy speeches, for which Romilly reproached him with obvious pain, protesting at once his attachment to the God of Truth and his attachment to Lord Sidmouth. As a follower of the God of Truth he abominated spies: as a follower of Lord Sidmouth he disliked the proposed inquiry. His vote went to Lord Sidmouth. Tierney brought the sub- ject home to his audience by a simple analogy, making no 1 February n, 1818. 2 Any one who compares the facts set out by Bennet in his speech with the information disclosed in the Home Office Papers must admire the success with which he had pieced the story together. The difficulties are obvious, for of course to admit that one had been in Oliver's presence was inviting danger, he made a slip or two but was on the whole singularly accurate. 3 Debate on Spies and Informers, Hansard, February u, 1818. 4 See p. 364 above. 

wild demand on their imagination. 'Suppose one of these artful informers persuaded a gentleman who kept five horses, to return only four, and afterwards not only made the fact known to the commissioners, but participated in the reward; if the matter were brought before parliament, would not every gentleman start from his seat, and demand an instant and a strict inquiry? Yet where was the distinction, except that here the lives of poor men, and not the pockets of rich men were concerned?' It is probable that the Government fell under graver suspicion than they deserved in consequence of their refusal of an inquiry and the line of their defence. There is no reason to suppose that Sidmouth deliberately employed Oliver for the diabolical purpose of fomenting an abortive rebellion, and this view was undoubtedly held at the time. The guilt of the Government was grave enough but it was not this. They took Oliver into their employment without knowing anything of his character. Their own correspondents sent them information, early in his career, that would have put any Home Secretary, who had the slightest sense of respon- sibility for the lives and liberties of his countrymen, on his guard. Then came the disclosures of the Leeds Mercury, which were brought to the notice of Parliament at the time by Burdett. When Brandreth and his fellow victims were on their trial the Government knew enough about Oliver to make them suspect that these foolish ranters had been drawn into their ludicrous escapade by the craft of the man who was receiving the money of the taxpayers and acting as their servant. The temptation to produce something that looked like a spontaneous disturbance was strong, for hitherto the life of the country had borne no resemblance to the pictures drawn by the Government in the House of Commons. Moreover if Oliver's part in the Derbyshire rising had been made public, the part he had played elsewhere could scarcely be hushed up. Sidmouth never professed to put a high value on the liberty of a working man, and he would easily satisfy himself that Oliver's miserable victims were better out of the world or at any rate out of the country. His conduct accordingly seemed less shocking to him than to many of his contemporaries, and the alternative of a possible exposure of the entire system of espionage would have appeared to him a far greater catastrophe than a miscarriage of justice. 


The history of the Oliver affair is important because it influenced English opinion on the whole subject of Reform. In Lancashire and in some other parts of England spies were constantly shadowing the lives of working men. This system had attracted little notice until 1817, when Oliver, thinking to take rather more valuable prizes than his fellow spies, entered into relations with the middle-class reformers, and made the mistake of trying to draw into his toils men whose education and position enabled them to defend themselves. If Oliver had been less ambitious and contented himself with the ordinary working-class victims, this great exposure would probably never have come about, and his career would have continued. Bennet pressed the obvious moral in the House of Commons, that Fletcher of Bolton ought to be removed from the Commission of the Peace. Sidmouth was not likely to punish a man for acting as he acted himself, and there is nothing to show that Fletcher modified his practices in consequence. But the revelations of this debate were an important element in the conversion of the middle classes to Reform. One other comment is suggested by the affair. To many historians the odium that surrounds the memory of Castlereagh is a mystery. As modern investigation has revised the traditional accounts between him and Canning, he has gained in reputation as a Foreign Minister. Recent military n story has awarded him the palm of comparative success in a sphere where all his contemporaries reaped unqualified failure. 1 In both these fields he has deserved the distinguished reparation that has been made to him. How comes it then, some historians ask, that Castlereagh went to his grave amid a hatred that death itself could not abate for a single hour, and that his memory was pursued with a bitter- ness unique in the history of public men? The answer is that of the three men whose government of England is symbolised in the two words, Oliver and Peterloo, Sidmouth was saved by his comparative obscurity, and Canning was saved by his later life, and thus Castlereagh stands out in the popular mind as the type of methods that are odious to the English nature. Historians who only think of England as an aristocracy in mortal conflict with Europe's tyrant attribute to spontaneous malice the hatred that haunted the Minister who defended her with such resolution and courage. But 1 Fortescue, History of tht British Army.

the mass of his countrymen remembered the War Minister who sent the armies to the Peninsula as the Minister who employed German mercenaries at the public flogging of English peasants, and the diplomatist whose heart never failed him in the dark hours of the war with Napoleon as the politician who regarded the poor of his own country as he regarded the Jacobins of France. Hence in the Mask of Anarchy Sidmouth passes riding on his crocodile, and Eldon weeping big tears that turn to millstones, but Castlereagh is followed by seven bloodhounds and throws them the hearts of his countrymen to chew.

APPENDIX OLIVER'S LATER HISTORY MR. A. C. G. LLOYD, the Librarian of the South African Public Library, was kind enough to write to us after reading The Town Labourer to say that there was good reason to believe that Oliver turned up afterwards in Cape Colony as William Oliver Jones, Inspector of Buildings during the Governorship of Lord Charles Somerset, and he directed our attention to documents that were likely to throw some light on the point. From these documents it seems quite clear that Jones was Oliver. Lord Charles Somerset is described by Dr Theal as a high-handed and extravagant Governor, and his administration provoked a great deal of discontent. Some of his critics roundly accused him of corruption. Certain of these allegations were examined by a Commission of Inquiry which was sent to the Cape. One of the complaints urged against Somerset was that he treated Jones as an intimate and confidential adviser and that Jones had received advances from the Public Treasury for buildings for which he gave no account. The Commission of Inquiry found fault with these financial arrangements, and both Lieut. -Colonel Bird, who was Secretary to the Government at the Cape from 1818 to 1824, and Somerset made statements to the Commission about Jones which bear on his history. Bird, who was very hostile to Somerset, said: 'Lord Charles Somerset may now affect to regret having placed so much confidence in W. O. Jones, but was Lord Charles Somerset ignorant of the character of W. O. Jones? did he not know who W. O. Jones was? and may it not be inferred that therefore he gave him confidential employment?' (Theal, Records of the Cape Colony, vol. xxi. p. 168). Somerset gave some important evidence about the circumstances under which Jones originally found public employment. 'I have now only to add that the employment of W. O. Jones did not originate with me. When I returned from England I found him superintending the repairs of the wharf and doing the duty of inspector of government buildings, the inspector having had a long leave of absence from the acting Governor. Lieut. -Colonel Bird informed me, that Mr. W. O. Jones brought out a letter from Mr. Goulburn, under date lOtii January 1820, recommending him for employment here, and it was in consequence of such 77 

recommendation of him that I confirmed him in the appointment of inspector of government buildings on the resignation of Mr. Melville' (Ibid., vol. xxiii. p. 475). Mr. Goulburn was Under-Secretary for the Colonies from 1812 to 1821. This statement explains how it is that Jones was able to enter Cape Colony without the usual formalities, which at the time were very strict. There is no record of his receiving any permit. Jones was more than once publicly identified with Oliver and the allegation was never directly denied. Thus a colonist of the name of Bishop Burnett, who brought several charges against Lord Charles Somerset, accused Jones of writing and posting up a libellous placard attacking the Governor in the hope of incriminating Burnett. This charge was not proved, but in his petition to Parliament Burnett calls Jones 'Oliver the spy,' and Brougham when presenting that petition referred to this allegation (Hansard, June 16 and 22, 1825). Jones died in August 1827 without ever accounting for the public money that had passed through his hands (Bird's state- ment, Theal's Records, vol. xxxiii. p. 392.) Compare Somerset's statement, ibid., vol. xxxi. p. 275: 'It has long been matter of more regret and vexation to me than I can find words to express, that the inspector neglected to keep his accounts in the form required, which has rendered it impossible to ascertain with precision the exact expense of each distinct service on which the artificers and labourers were employed under him.' He left a will, dated 10th December 1824 (Cape Archives Orphan Chamber Wills, vol. ciii. of 1827) in which he described himself as a native of Ponsonbury in the County of Salop, aged about fifty, and married to Harriet born Dear of Fulbourn, Cambridgeshire.

