# Despard Plot



Despard Plot https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Despard_Plot 1802  

?Brandreth spectator at execution of Despard eg https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001316/18171105/002/0002 (widely syndicated?)


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000341/18021126/007/0004
Chester Chronicle - Friday 26 November 1802

REPORTED CONSPIRACY. ( From the London Prints) For days past there have Leen floating rumours of plots an conspiracies in this metropolis. } Even so tar back as the period of the Middlesex Election, a pian was said to be in contemplation for pulling down the in Cold-bath fields, and the Magistrates, with pr Police-officert, were placed to guard it,—Such a plan, uN i effect, might produce the most serious J consequences to the Goverriment and Country, but it was connected with the popular feeling particularly excited at the tinse by that establishment, beyond which the parties in the plan, if any such ever existed, pro- hably didnot carry their views, Some weeks ago we heard the Corresponding Society was again holding its meetings, Events have now occurred which these meetings gave reason to expect. Of these we have obtained from quarters most likely to be well informed, and upon whose veracity we rely. On Tuesday (the 16th inst.) information was given bw to the Magistrates at Union Hall, in con- 7 sequence of which Colonel Despard and his associates were apprehended, Next morning, Wednesday, Col. Despard ‘underwent a long private examination at Union Hall, after which he was committed to the County Gaol of Surry, The rest were committed to various prisons without any examinagion, On Friday, a meeting of the Privy Council was held at Lord Pelham's Office, to examine farther into the charges exhibited against Calonel Despard, and the party apprehended with him, About ten o’clock a Serjeant’s Guard arrived, with six privates belonging to the frst and second regiment of Guards, appre- hended the preceding morning. Two of the men were examined, but the particulars did not transpire. About the same time, Colonel Despard was brought to the Office, without irons, and underwent a very short examination. He was fully committed to gate, to take bis trial, but not for High Treason, as it has been reported, in pletting against the life of his Majesty—no evidence te that effect was The crime he was ef, is, seducing some of,the It has been Guards frem thelr duty and allegiance. idly rumoured, that more than 200 of them were se- duced ; but we can assert, from unquestionable rity, that the number is not so great. Mrs. Des-. attended im the morning, to ask permission to age the Colonel, to ive him a change of linen, &e. In the afternoon Sir ichard Ford granted her request. About half past ten an Officer arrived at the Office with Charles endie, whom he had apprehended by virtue of a warrant, charging him with treasonable practices. He isa journeyman, but was some time since a master shoemaker in the neighbourhood of Red Lion-square. He was confined about two years ago in Gloucester Gaol, with Binns. The Officer searched him and found u in him a card, engraved with a neat device, and round it London Corresponding united for Partiam orm. In the tourse of his examination, he was asked if he had not associated with soldiers lately, particularly at Windsor, to which he mott firmly answered in the negative, and assured the Cabinet Council, that since his enlargemeat from prison he had attended closely to his business, and had not associated above twice with any of his political fsiends.—He is about 23 years of age, and . enjoys but a bad state of health, in consideration of which he committed to Tothill-fields Bridewell, where he would be provided with a good bed, and haye every thing conifortable, He was accordingly sent there, handcuffed with a private in the Guards, appre- ended on Tuesday night at the meeting. © Jobn Francis and Thomas Broughton, apprehended at the meeting on Tuesday night, were brought from the New Prison, Clerkenwe)l, heavily ironed, They. underwent an examination. The printed forms of oaths found upon Broughton were produced against him, These men were remanded back to prison, On Saturday morning the Privy Council again met at Lord Pelbany’s Otfice. Thomas Newman, a soldier, was the first person examined 5 after a short hearing, he was conrmitted to the Savoy Prison, instead of Tothilfields Bridewell, the place whence he was taken. John James Wratten, John Doyle, and Sa- muel Smith, were all examin » and remanded to Tothilifields Bridewell. In the course of the day, several soldiers were likewise brought forward. The Landlord of the public house, in Oakley-street, where Colonel Despard and his associates were assembled hen they were apprehended, was also brought up, au tthere being no proof that he knew the meeting was held for any particular purpose, he was not detained, Whatever may have been the object of the persons apprehended, and of those connected with thems, ic is ¢ertain that no positive proof has yet appeared of their entertaining any design (asewas reported) to assassi-~ nate. the King, on his way to the house of Peers.— Their assemblies have been held with much secrecy, and their numbers are very considerable, In the Bo- rough of Southwark alone, there were seven divisions and eight sub-divisions of them, all regularly organis- ed. Each sub-division had four Delegates, all of them valified to vote at a General Meeting, the time and place of which were always kept secret until within afew hours of its assembling. The great allureménts held out to the by the Delegates, was, that large Sums of money were expected to. be remitted from France, and that, on accomplishing their object, they would be allowed 3s. 6d. per day, for life. Among the papers found in the possession of the prisoners, seditious toasts and songs, but the most material was one declaratory of certain rights, with a copy of the oath taken on becoming 4 member. It begins with— Constitution, Independence of Jreland and Great Britain, Equatization of all Cwie Rights."— Then follows an assurance that the members will unite to maintain the families of ail those heros who may fall in contending for their rights. The words of the oath run nearly thus? « 1, 4. B. do hereby swear to endeavour, to the wimost of my power, to obtain the objects above siated, aud that fears, rewatds, nor punishments, shail compel me to resign those rights and privileges which the Supreme Being in his bountiful goodness has given to all men; and that mo force whatever shall induce me to give iniormativa im the business—So help me Gon.” We annex an accurate list of the names of the per- sons who have been apprehended, and the Prisons in which they are confined: Newgate.—Edward Marcus Despard. New Prison Clerkenwell «John Francis, Thomas Jackson, alias Philips, Dennis M'Geae, Thos. Brough tun, Edward Russell, James Pricey Lander. Tothill-fields Bridevel!.—J. Wood, Jerome Ganer, Thomas Newman, fobn Connolly, James Sedgwick Daniel Tendall, Charles Dry, Joseph Blake, John Vincent, Peter Pollard, Owen Byrne, alies Jobo Lambert, John Abraham Bayly, So! Lawrence § ridan, Chas. Whichelo, Michael O'Neil, George Wade, Samuel Smith, John Emblin, Charles M‘Cooty, Wheeler, Charles Pendle, This business is likely to engross the whole atien- tion of Government for some days, and will be pro- secuted with all the zeal and energy, which a case of such great magnitude ought to excite. It is expected that a Special Commission will be immediately issued for the tiial of the offenders. It is to take place in Middlesex, and not in Surry, Colonel Despard, on bis arrest, made no resistance. He has been ever since very silent and composed in his manner. After his examination before the Privy Council, he appeared very much dejected. It is almost unnecessary to add, that he is the Colonel Despard who was so long con- fined in Coldbath-fields Prison. 

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000156/18030126/009/0004
Bury and Norwich Post - Wednesday 26 January 1803


HIGH TREASON. Thursday the Special Commission appointed to try Colonel Despard and others, was opened at the New Sessions-house, Newington, before Lord Chief Justice Ellenborough, Mr. Justice Le Blanc, Mr. Justice Chambre, and Mr, Baron Thomson. 

 ;. " ' Lord Viscount jh-esliev Foreman - Lord Visfount Crardey i John P. Kensington, Esq. J.ord William Russell ' Joseph Bradtiey.- Esq. Hon. Chapel Norton" Henry Thornton, Esq - . Mr Mark Parsnns, Br-.rt. Henry Peters, Esq. ■ ■- Sir ?? Frederick, Bart. : Thomas Page, Esq. . Sir 'George Glyn, Bart. Tohn Whitmofe, Esq. Sir Thomas Turton, Bart. Thomas I .angley, Esq. Sir Robert Burnett, Knt. William Borrodale,Esq. R. Hankey, Esq. L Thomas Gaitskell, Esq. Thomas Trotter, Esq. 'Richard Wyatt, Esq. Joseph Alcock, Esq. John Webb Vftston, Esq, The Counsel that appeared for the Crown were, Mr. Attorney General, Mr. Solicitor Ge- neral, Messrs. Plower, Fielding, and Abbott. _ Lord Ellenborough addressed the Jury in nearly the following terms :— Gentlemen of tbe Grand Jury, You are assembled here to-day, under the au- thority of his M-ijesty's Commission, for the purpose of entering upon the trial of certain persons charged with offences of High Treason and Misprision of Treason, which are describ- ed in the said Commission. There are various statutes explaining the nature of High Treason, but the statute ofthe 3«th ofthe present reign, which particularly applies to the case that is to be submitted to your consideration, provides with peculiar care for the safety of his Majesty's sacred person. There is' also -a statute .of the 37ih of the present King,- to punish the seduc- tion of any of his Majesty's forces from their allegiance,' or their incitement to mutiny ; and another statute ofthe same year to prohibit the administering of unlawful oaths, which refer to the case that you are called upon to investigate. Many of the offences described in the Acts I have alluded to, are peculiarly malignant in their effects, having a direct tendency to disturb the order of any s rciety, and to subvert all Go- vernment ; the Legislature have, therefore, at all times ranked them among the highest class of crimes. By this description I would be un- derstood to mean the crime of High Treason, and every tiling connected with the security of his Maiesty's person. With a view to that se- curity," the Act of the 37th of the present reign was- particularly- drawn up, and without doubt the offences against which that Act provides are second only in enormity, and inferior only in magnitude to the absolute commission of the worst species of Ilij-h Treason ; indeed in many cases of High Treason, they form a material part. The law, of course, has guarded against them with the utmost jealousy and anxiety- it has always endeavoured to watch over and protect the person of the King ; it is for that reason that in this case, the operations of the mind, the secret workings of malevolence are con :idered, so far as they are manifested by any overt acts. The law takes into account every- thing which indicates a disposition hostile to his existence, and therefore equally regards the contrivance and the actual perpetration of the crime. To enquire into such contrivances, and to ascertain how far such designs may he attributa- ble to the accused, has at all times been the province of the Jury. What should be deemed overt acts of High Treason, what properly amounted to the offence of compassing the King's life, and what legal evidence-was neces- sary to establish the charge, has been occa- sionally subject to some dispute ; but long pre- vious to the Act of the 36th of the present King, the point waa settled by Judges of the hist eminence and talent, that any attempt to subject the King's person to restraint, or to de- pot* hifn from his authority, implied the mast flagitious purpose of Treason, and any evidence of such attempt was received as irresistible proof of guilt. It was also decided by the same high autho- rity, that any consultation, agreement, or reso- lution, to effect this detestable design, although nothing was actually done, although the whole plan shquld prove ineffectual and abortive, was yet sufficiently demonstrative x>f treasonable in- tentions. If such consultation, agreement, or resolution, could be collected and proved by such modes of acquiescence and approbation as would convince the minds of men upon ordi- nary subjects, they were deemed overt acts to establish the charge of compassing the death ot the King ; but in order to do away every pre- tence for doubt, to remove all remaining grounds of controversy, it was thought advisea- ble to propose the statute ofthe 36th of his pre- sent Majesty. By that statute it is, among other things, enacted, that whoever proposes, invents, or devises any bodily harm to his Ma- jesty, shall be deemed a traitor, and sutler all the oenalties and forfeitures of High Treason. Compassing, therefore, the imprisonment of the- King, was pronounced a substantive act of Treason. Such, indeed, was the opinion of some of the ablest lawyers this country has ever seen, upon the construction of the 25th of Edward III. ; but as some difference of senti- ment existed, the statute of the 36th of his present Majesty was rendered necessary. I have selected those statutes which relate to compassing and imagining the death of the King, and described the species of crimes to which it is probable your attention will be di- rected in the course of your enquiry. I have statfed to you what, in my judgment, is meant ?? overt act of Treason, and I have now to atM; tftat it is prescribed by the Act of the 7th r bF WOHam 111. that the overt acts should be expressly laid in the indictment ; but accord- ing to practice, founded in the legal construc- tion of that Act, the nature only of the overt act is set down — the numerous particulars con- nected with it, with all their shades and circum- stances, it is never conceived necessary to de- tail. It is considered enough to notice trie overt act, and leave its several appendages to be made out and explained by the result of subsequent investigation. I have said. thus much in the hope of affording you some assistance towards understanding the indictment, which is no doubt couched in technical language. You will be better able to judge of its merits, when you have had an opportunity of examining the proofs which will be laid before you. I shall now state to you what by law is re- quired in trials of this kind ; first then, the trial must take place in that county where an overt act of High Treason shall he proved to have been committed ; that is, it must appear that in that county some consultation must have been held, some evidence of an attempt to com- pass the death ofthe King, or levy war against him within that district must be given. These thing are essentially necessary* to invest you with legal competence to proceed in the trial of a case of such a description as that which is now before you. This point established, you can afterwards go on in the investigation of any , other overt acts committed elsewhere, in fur- therance of the treasonous project, and which may tend to corroborate the accusation. So much as to locality. The law also demands that two witnesses 'shall be adduced to prove an overt act of High Treason, or that one wit- ness shall prove one asdsft, and a second witness another, both of the same species of treason.- Such has been the law in all cases of Treason, except in the case of an actual attempt upon the life of the King, which, according to the afts ofthe 30th and -40th of his present Majesty, may be established by cne witness, as upon a charge of murder. lam not, however, aware that any actual attempt upon his Majesty's life forms apart ofthe charges upon which you are to deliberate ; therefore it was not necessary for me to state this part of the law. I should in- deed feel that an* apology was due to you, for trespassing so much on your time, if it were not obviously my duty to describe the nature and quality of the various points involved in this important question, and perhaps nothing is more material to observe upon, than the description of evidence thht you are likely to receive. It is very remarkable, but it is of the nature of guilt, that the guilty generally pursue that course which produces their owndetectfon. When familiar with the contemplation of wickedness, when long brooding over the exe- cution of their detestable views, they imagine that other minds are equally disposed with their own to acts of baseness. This supposition often generates rashness, in prompting them to make overtures of co-operation to others, and fully communicatiug their designs ; thus are they 6educed to confidence — led on to detection, and by such means the public safety has been frequently preserved. With regard to the business now l>efore you, the disclosure of all the springs of the conspi- racy seems to hare come from those who were accomplices in the crime *, who had a partici- pation of the guilt. It was not a discovery re- sulting from accident, or the diligent search of the loyal, but entirely revealed by conspirators themselves, by the misled and the deluded You will, therefore, feel that the testimony of such persons should be received with a sober degree of caution and prudence • that if it has not internal evidence to sustain it...if it is not confirmed by strong circumstances, a Jury can- not come to any satisfactory conclusions upon it. But these observations will best apply to a Jury different from you, to that which shall be appointed to determine npon the final result of this trial. It will be for them to see that such a correct consistency shall appear in the state- ment ofthe several witne.sesforthe prosecution, such an exact conformity in all the parts of their narrative, and that narrative so supported by collateral and concomitant cirenmstances, as to form on the whole, in the minds of that Jury, a rational ground for belief. Upon this must depend the sum and substance of the cre- dibility which the evidence for the Crown in this trial can obtain. You will bear in mind, Gentlemen, that my arguments upon this part ofthe subject, apply to the Jury which is ultimately to decide ; that it belongs to you only to pronounce whether there is a reasonable and probable ground of guilt on the part of the persons charged before you, and if so to submit them to a final verdict. If such ground shall appear to you, it is your duty to send the case of the prisoners to an ul- terior jurisdiction. I cannot conclude my remarks upon the evi- dence on this occasion without observing, that to refuse a due and proper credit to accomplices, would be to protect conspiracy by the very means of its own malignity and extent. Such a principle of regughance to approvers would, in my opinion, be inconsistent with the solici- tude we should all feel for our common safety, would in facdst be opposite to every received idea of common sense. I forbear to detail the particulars of the charges contained in the commission, even brief as they appear to me at present, and by for- bearing to do so, I wish to avoid exciting any prejudices ; because the more effectually preju- dices of every description can be obviated and excluded, the more effectually the ends of jus- tice will be attained. This much, however, I must say, that if the desperate chance of success from any exertions of which the persons charged with being concerned in this conspiracy could be capable, should render the conspiracy itself in your minds improbable, if a plot formed and nurtured under such auspices, should ap- pear to you so hopeless as to be almost incre- dible, 1 have not the shadow of doubt that, should their guilt be established by proof, your diffidence wilt be superceded by surprise and horror — surprise at the boldness of their enter- prise, and hoi-ror at the consequences that were likely to ensue. Considering the character and information of tbe persons that I have had to address, I feel, Gentlemen, that I have occupied too much of your time ; but actuated by a strong sense of duty, I have endeavoured to point your atten- tion to the laws relative to treason ; to the proofs necessary to establishacharge underthose laws; to the nature, effect, aud value of the evidence you are about to receive— and from those state- ments you will draw such conclusions as to your own judgment may seem meet. You will now proceed, Gentlemen, to apply yourselves to the object of your appointment, fairly and fully to investigate the merits of a question deeply affecting the interests of the persons concerned, and of material importance to the country. I have no doubt that you will devote your utmost attention and intelligence to the subject, and that your decision will be strictly consonant to your duty — that it will be marked with justice to the accused, to the public, and to your own characters. Lord Ellenborough, having concluded his charge, ?? 1 1. Twenty-one W itnesses were sworn in Court, in order to interrogation by the Grand Jury- on the several points in the indictment, which included the names of the Prisoners ; and the greater part of those witnesses were examined by the Grand Jury, in the course of their inves- tigation, which continued until about 20 mi- nutes after eight at night, the Court sitting the whole time. The Jury then returned a True Bill against the following Prisoners :— Edward Marcus Despard Thomas Broughton Jas. Sedgwick Wraghtcn William Lander Arthur. Graham Samuel Smyth John M'Namara John Wood John Francis, Thomas Newman Daniel Tv-ndall John Doyle, Thomas Philips No true bill was found against Charles Pendrill ; Cono.lv was admitted an evidence For the Crown ; and Winterbottom was left ill in Newgate. The Prisoners were then brought into Court, and being informed by the proper officer that the Bill of Indictment was found against them, and that they would be put upon their trials : and being a ,: ked to name their Counsel for the approbation of the Court. Mr. Despard named Mr. Serjeant Best and Mr. Gurney — whom the Court assigned. The other Prisoners not having chosen their Counsel, were informed by the Court, that they would be called up and arraigned on their in- dictment upon the sth of February, and tried on the 7th ; and that at any time previous to the former day they would be at liberty to serve notice of the names of such Counsel as they should chuse upon the Judge 3 at Chambers for tiieir approbation. The Special Commission Court then adjourned to the 5th of February.



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000230/18030214/007/0003
Hampshire Chronicle - Monday 14 February 1803

TRIALS FOR HIGH TREASON.

NEW SESSIONS-HOUSE, the BOROUGH- Monday, Feb, 7, 1803.

THE Court met pursuant adjournment, and proceeded to try Edward Marcus Despard, when the Jury being sworn, The Attorney General then rose, and spoke to the following effect: Gentlemen of the Jury, it obvious that the attention paid to any subject exactly in proportion to its importance. I have not doubt, therefore, since you are acquainted with the nature of the inquiry that comes before you, that you will listen patiently to my address, and that the evidence afterwards to be adduced will be attentively heard and anxiously cpnsidered by you. A more important case, either to the prisoner at the bar, or the public, never was presented to any Jury. The charge that of High Treason, and upon his guilt or innocence depend the life the prisoner, together with all that valuable in this world—his property, his respectability, his situation after death. Nothing can "more nearly touch the vital interests of the public, than that, there has been a plot overturn the Constitution and to introduce universal confusion by an attempt upon the person of our beloved Sovereign, the base, profligate, and black-hearted conspirator should delivered over to the law, and suffer that punishment which his crime deserves. The malignity required to fit man for entering into such desperate projects, so far from exciting iy prejudice against the accused, ought rather to raise a presumption his favour, and ought confirm that principle in our law, that "every man shall be considered innocent until he proved to guilty." On this very account the charge should be carefully watched, the evidence should diligently sifted, and your minds should be fully satisfied the prisoner's guilt before you give him up the awful consequences verdict against him upon such an indictment. But, Gentlemen, the charge substantiated, look forward with confident »n to your pronouncing the prisoner guilty treason with as little hesitation as if had been tried for any other capital offence. shall now state, with all the brevity can, the nature this charge. The prisoner is accused of High Treason. There are three counts the indictment, charging the different acts have been done with three several intentions: 1. To compass and imagine the death of the King : 2. restrain and imprison his person and 3. To dethrone him from the stile and title the Imperial Crown of this Realm. The first count concerning the attempt upon the King's life, upon the old statute of Edw. III. the second and third are framed upon Acts which recently passed, which the intention (manifested by overt act) to lay a restraint upon the King's person, or to depose him from his royal authority, made a substantive act of treason. However criminal the intention, you are probably aware, Gentlemen, that this must be openly indicated an act, commonly called ovat There are eight overt acts stated this indictment, which may be divided into two classes. 'Fhe tour first charge the seduction his Majesty's troops, for the purpose of assassinating, imprisoning, and dethroning him, and the remainder actual plans'for the direct accomplishment these purposes. considering overt act, you are to look to the intent with which it was done, and though the success the treasonable plot shouid not be insured it, notwithstanding may sufficient uijnilest the treasonable Which the law looks. For man have card his pocket seem; perfectly innocent ; but this card contains the words a treasonable engagement, and proves that a conspiracy exists to overturn the Government, it clearly overt act treason. Such evidence will adduced against the prisoner, and you will draw the concllidon from it. You will observe, Gentlemen, that this charge in the shape of conspiracy. Therefore in considering its truth, two .question* arise : 1. Whether such conspiracy existed 2. If did exist, whether this individual was engaged it Evidence concerning the others therefore not only admissible, but necessary. When the conspiracy is thus proved, then indeed it must brought strictly home to him by his own acts. The.. Attorney General then entered into a long detail of facts, which were to proved evidence. The first witness called on the part of the prosecution, was. Mr. John Stafford. Me said he was clerk to the Magistrates Union Hall; that consequence an order received from them, and warrant, signed by Carpenter Smith, Esq. and another Magistrate, he went, with number of Police Officers, on the evening of Tuesday the of November, public house called the Oakley Arms, Oakley-street, Lambeth. They went up stairs, and entered a room which were about thirty persons, among whom was Colonel Despard, and most the other prisoners named the indictment. They appeared to all, except Colonel Despard, of the lower orders of people, and very meanly dressed. None them wore regimentals'; but one or two had red jackets on. The constables who went along with him, placed themselves such a situation as to prevent any the people from getting away. One the patrole came and told the witness, that there was a man who refused to be searched; upon which Rivett, the Bow-street Officer, came up and said, " that Colonel Despard." There was no other person, having the appearance a Gentleman at the time, but him.—Colonel Despard desired to know what authority the Officers came there? The witness told him, came under the authority warrant, signed by two Magistrates; he insisted on seeing it, but the witness would, only shew him the signatures. The prisoner was then searched, and appeared very indignant that that should be done. Nothing was found upon him. He had his hand a green silk umbrella, with a crooked-top, like walking stick, and no body else had an umbrella there but himself. Three printed papers were found, one on the floor, and others possession of persons in the room. The thirty persons were all taken into custody, and sent'otf under proper guards, in coaches provided for the purpose. The witness continued at the house till all the peoplewere sent off {o place of safety. While he was below the tap room, a man came in dressed like a'brick-layer, whose name he has since understood be Thomas Windsor? this person called for beer and tobacco. The witness had some conversation \vith him, consequence of which he desired him to at,,tend next day at Union-Hall. lie attended accordingly, and produced another paper on which he wrote his name. When Windsor was examined, he said knew Colonel Wrattan, John Francis and Wood; togethemvith and s.nith. The time the prisoners and the others were seized, was the evening of that day when the Parliament met: but his Majesty did not come down to the House that day.—The printed papers found in the room were then produced by the witness and read. They were as follow: Constitution.—»* The independence of Great Britain and Ireland-—an equalization of civil, political, and religious rights—an ample provision for the heroes who shall fail the contest, liberal reward for distinguished merit. These are the objects for Which we contend; and to obtain these objects, we swear be united in the awful presence of Go d !" FORM OF THE OATH. " I, A. B. do voluntarily declare, that I will endeavour, to the utmost of my power, the objects this union namely, to recover those rights which the Supreme Being, in his infinite bounty, has given all men: that neithee-hopes, fears, rewards, nor punishments, shall ever induce me to give any information, directly, or indirectly, concerning the business, or of any member this, or any society. help Goo !" • Charles Bacon, a Bow-street Officer, spoke to the same tacts related the last Witness, whom he accompanied the 16th of November to the Oakley Arms. While some of the Constables went search after coaches, Colonel Despard, who was walking up and down the room wanted know why he was detained there? some the-, people then jumped up, and the Colonel cried out—" One all you follow me." All the Patrole, who had gone down stairs, were then called and the people prevented from going- Thomas Windsor was then called. lie said he was private in the Guards, and belonged the Grenadier Company the First Battalion. In the month of March last he had been with his regiment at Chatham, and on his return from that place he received some printed papers from John Francis, which afterwards shewed to a Mr. Bowness, an army agent, and who belonged to die Transport-office, and told him how he got possession of them; he left one them with him ; who at the time gave him advice as what he was to do. When Francis gave this paper to the witness, he told him the object of those concerned with him, was unite in overturning the present tyrannical system government, to unite different companies, and get arms. Francis applied also Thomas Blades, a soldier belonging to the same company with the witness, unite the same plan. Shortly -after this the witness attended meeting, which was held at public-house St. Giles's, where was sworn in by Francis, who gave him printed card containing the form of oath he was to take. This was the same card he gave The manner his taking the oath was, reading it over secretly himself, and then kissing the card. This he did by the direction Francis. When the person about to be sworn could not read, the man, bringing him forward, read the oath to him, and he kissed the card. About a week after this transaction, Francis gave the witness some more cards, order that he might distribute them, considered him person capable of taking tin* command a company. After this the witness was present at several meetings, which were attended by from 16 to i? 5 persons, principally consisting labouring Irishmen of the lowest class. one of these meetings, there was person named Macnamara, commonly called Mr. Mac, who proposed to the company that they should change houses, often it was possible, in order avoid detection. This was accordingly done, and other houses was resorted to. The witness amended some meetings Bleeding Heart,inChailesstreet, Hatton-gardcn, and Francis was there. Brought accompanied the witness to one these meetings. The object of the members was to unite, to raise subscriptions • to pay- Delegates to into the country, and to defray the pence of printing the affidavits, and their principal purpose was to overturn the present system government, and to destroy the Royal Family. Tho«e purposes were frequently mentioned in the meetings. The persons belonging to these Societies were to be divided into companies; each company consisted often men, which was added an eleventh man, who took the command the company: the person who did so, was generally the man" who swore them in, and after he took the command, he was called the Captain of the company ten. The Society was divided into several divisions. These was a division the Borough, one Mary-le-bonne, another at and one from Blackwall, and upwards, towards the city. The next order was, that the oldest Captain of five Companies took the command these fifty men, and was called the Colonel that sub-division. Francis and Macnamara told the witness that he should be Colonel of the Borough division. These two persons called themselves Colonel under the head Colonel or Commander Chief. The Spread F.agle, in Mill-lane, was. one of the houses which meetings used to take place. The persons who generally resorted here, were discharged men from the navy, and others, who had been used to the great gun exercise. Wrattan, who called himself a Colonel, generally held his divisions at a house called the Hoop and Bam. The witness knew the Oakley Arms public-house in Lambeth, where he attended some meetings, particular one on Lord Mayor's Day ; there were about thirty men present. said at that time, that he received about fifteen shillings and sixpence, to pay for sending delegates into the country, and to pay for the printing of oaths. Before this time the witness had been at a meeting in Windmill-street, where there were about sixteen persons present. Encouragements were given to get as many recruits as possible, and cards were produced for the purpose, which were to be distributed through the country. The witness paid shilling for his affidavit the time he was sworn. The witness then spoke of some other meeting, at which nothing material occurred. But he recollected, one Sunday evening about three weeks before Lord Mayor's Day, he went, consequence of an order to that purpose, to attend a meeting at the Bell public-house on Tower-hill; but the landlord could not admit them, because the evening service was going on at that time. They then proceeded to suttling-house in the Tower, with their number diminished from twentyfive to about sixteen. They sat drinking the kitchen in the house; and were laying plan*, by which some were to down Woolwich, to the W arren, and try get people there to unite with them. Oh Friday, the 12th November, the witness was doing some bricklayer's work house, near Westsquare, when came him, and said, will introduce you good company come the Flying Horse at The witness at first objected, saying could not neglect his business, he having a wife and family, support. The other replied, " d-—n it, you must, I neglect mine." The witness at last complied, and when he went the house was conducted by Brought ton into parlour: he there for the first Jtime. saw the prisoner at the bar, who called hfmself Colonel Despard. At the same time Broughton told him who he was. The witness then said, he made his obedience to the Colonel, and took a seat. There were also present a Mr. Emblyn, Sam. Smith, and Arthur Graham, who held a conversation with the prisoner.— Emblyn was recommending the prisoner to have' a regular organisation London. The prisoner replied-—" No, a regular organisation in London would dangerous, because* the place is so much under the eye of Government." The Colonel then said/that a regular organization in the cOGntry was necessarv,.and he believed it general. The people, said, was every where ripe, and were anxious for the moment the attack "and (added he), believe this to be the moment; particularly Leeds, Sheffield, Birmingham, and every great town throughout the kingdom. I have walked twenty miles to-day, andwherever have been the people are ripe." Colonel Despard then said, that "the attack was to be made tire day when His Majesty should to the Parliament House, and that His Majesty must be put to death." He observed, the same time, " have weighed the matter well, and heart callous." After the destruction of the King the mail coaches were to be stopped, as a signal to the people in the country that the revolt had taken place town. When this conversation was over, he returned"to the witness and said, *' Windsor, Wood has mentioned you lo me, shall glad if you will meet next Monday at half past eleven, on Tower-hill, and bring" with you four or five intelligent men, in order that we may consult about the best manner of taking the Tower and securing the arms." The witness said he would ;• and pursuant his promise, he met the prisoner Monday the 15th of November, at the Tyger public-house on Tower-hill; the witness had two three soldiers along with him, one of whom was named Winter-bottom. The Colonel took this witness aside, and asked—" are these people belonging to us?''—On being answered that they were, he desired they might go along with him; but the witness observed there was only one he could depend on, and that was Winterbottom. then desired the witness to take, one direction, while he himself would take another, and meet him opposite Whitechapel Church. The witness did so. Colonel Despard then desired him to into a publichouse, while went after a man named Lynch, who had been lately discharged. about half an hour he returned with man in coloured clothes, named Heron, who a-discharged soldier. He then beckoned to the witness: they walked out together, accompanied by Winterbottom and Herom The Colonel then said", " We have been deceived as to the number of arms in the Bank there are only 600 stand there, and they have taken the hammers out to render them useless, as they must have been apprised intention. They went back again to the public-house, and. had some porter and bread and cheese. There were at the same time two soldiers sitting beside each other in box. Colonel Despard asked witness if he knew them? he »rw«wal no. " believe,' said the Colonel, "they belong to us"—(meaning bur society). He then spoke the following words privately to the witness: " Windsor, the King must be put death the day goes to the House Lords; and then Ihe people will beat liberty." —He said he would himself make the attack upon His»Majesty if he could get no assistance (meaning the Middlesex) side of the water: and that he would make the attack with what force he had. The of November was understood to be the day on which the King Was to go to the House of Lords. asked the witness, if he would meet him the next night, With seven, eight, or nine intelligent men, to consult upon the best method of attacking the Tower and securing the arms. The witness told him come forward himself the different meetings. About two o'clock that day they parted. On the same nay, the witness saw Wrattan and Wood. The latter said, that, when the King was going to the House, he would post himself as sentry over the great gun in the Park; that he would load it, and lire at His Majesty's coach as he passed through the Park. Wood might, the course of his duty, be sometimes placed as se:ftry over that gun. The witness then mentioned his having gone to the Oakley Arms, about nine o'clock, on the night the 16th, when all the people there were taken into custody. saw Mr. Stafford, told him who he was, gave him his address, and said he knew several circumstances relative to that night's business; and the next day, by appointment, he went to Union Hall. This witness was cross-examined Mr. Serjeant Best. He said he had been a soldier eleven years ; his age was now 25. He became a member of those meetings the month of May or June last. Being asked if he had not frequently brought men into those meetings, and sworn them ; he said he had introduced two men named Miham and Marrey, who told him they had been -alreadyjanited Irelaud. was often in the habit of bringing men to the meetings. He told Mr. Bowness, that he was acting spy on the meetings, and he wished for his own safety, to make them believe he was bringing men to them Mr. Bowness Examined. —What is your situation life? A. I am an Army Agent. Q, Have you ever had any conversation with the last Witness, Windsor? A. have, and some that appeared to me great importance. Q. Did he ever, before the time of the prisoner's being arrested at the Oakley Arms, give you any printed card or paper? A. He did. You then gave him some advice on the subject? A. Yes. I advised him to (here he was told by the Counsel, that would not be regular to tell what advice he gave, but merely to answer as to the fact ot giving advice to Windsor.) Q. Ts that the paper given you Windsor? A. is. [This paper was then read, which was a copy of the Constitution and Oath oi this new Association, and precisely similar to that which had been before read.] Thomas Blaize examined—Q. Who are you ? A. I am a private in the 2d battalion of Foot Guards. W first spoke to you relative to the business that are now enquiring into ? A. John Wood. Q. What was the substance of your conversation ? A. He tofd me that there was a great number Gentlemen who had determined to form an Independent Constitution for the Country, and advised * (Turn over)' 

me take an oath to join the Society.—The remainder of the evidence this Witness corroborated, in great measure, the statement given Windsor. John was then called. This was byfar the most important witness, both to detail of facts, and for being of superior understanding to those who preceded him. He deposed as follows:-!-" am watchmaker, and was one of Hiose apprehended the Oakley Arms, on the 16th November last, where the prisoners were taken up. Lander, one of the other prisoners, was the first who intimated to that societies that description were on foot. It was about four weeks before 1 was apprehended. met him one day, and he asked heard any news? I answered no! He replied, that there was something very particular the carpet—Had heard of any societies forming ? I told him that I had not; thought they were all done with. said, no, they were not, a party was forming stronger than ever had been yet, and that they looked up Colonel Despard as their head. After this saw person of the name of Broughton ; when first saw him I and I-andef were talking. I objected to their plans; but Brouahton said something must done before the Man Eaters met. called the Parliament the Man Faters. spoke with confident certainty of success. frequently invited attend, the meetings of their Society ; I told him had rhy family to attend to. produced some pieces badly printed paper. ( The witness was shewn the form of oath, and said it was the same). He said it was a society for them to know their friends by, at the same time told me, that all those who were-not of their principles were be put death when the grand attempt was made, being at the Queen's Anns, Friday the 12th November ; Graham was there, and came there. spoke to Graham and me. He asked down with him to the Flying Horse. said there would be such nice man there, he was sure should like his company. At first did not agree, and asked who it was? said it was Col.Despard. Before went, he said the day was fixed for the attack made. The King, said he, will stopped as goes to the House, and the business will settled. think he said also, that the Tower was to taken. Broughlon then said, must go, for the Colonel was a very punctual man, anil he (Broughtou) was then behind his time. He went out, atul took Graham with him. overheard him persuading Graham to go they seemed they were turning back stepped out and said-, you, Graham, will go, will go. Graham said, would there hour, and went away. Graham said me, did not know you were these sentiments: answered, not, but have mind go see the humour it. afterwards went the Fiying Horse; I found there Col. Despard, Broughton, Windsor, and Smith ; they were in small back room ; Windsor was there before came. Broughtou desired me to sit down ; made obeisance the Colonel, and sat down. Graham sat next Col. Despard, and f sat next Graham. was the first time entered that house. When got there, they were sneaking of the form used at the Tower passing the keys. When the Constable passed the keys, was usual to say, God bte-s the King and Queen Charlotte, to" which th** sentinel used reply, Amen but that late hal Imm-h discontinued, except one instauve, when the man was secreted. asked who Despard was ? told me was Col. I turned the Colonel, and said, sir, beg your pardon, I had not the pleasure knowing you before, but have read you the Cambridge Paper. The conversation turned on the Wet Dock?. It was something relative employing soldiers at the Wvt Docks. After a little time, a«ked Col. Bespand whether there was any particular business hand, and what he thought it? said, there was nothing particular, only seemed the wish great many people that an effort should made Tuesday week next to endeavour recover some of hose liberties which have lost. had any ground or sufficient force act upon? said, yes, very considerable force indeed ; least, ! can only say, the people come forward in the way have been given to understand. We have great numbers of the army, and there are great numbers i» all parts the kingdom, particularly Birmingham, Leeds, Manchester, Sheffield, and other great towns. not know that enumerate the towns the order which Col. Despard named them, but am sure mentioned all those towns. He added, that London, and about town, the people are every where ripe. said, that had been engaged in this business for two years, and added, have travelled miles to-day ; every where have been, the people are ripe, and "anxious for the moment of attack. the same conversation asked, he had any regular plan organisation ? He said no ! a regular organisation would be a moral impossibility was so near, and under the eye of Government ; but in the country it would more general. asked him if the attack was to be made in London and the country on one and the same day ? said no ! by no means, that would be highly improper but that it would be a signal the country the'stopping the mail and coaches. During the conversation he clenched the fist of his right hand and swore with oath, You will do good unless you secure the whole family. Broughton this shook his head knowing way, and said, that easily done. Some one said, How He replied,"shoot the two first horses, and then the carriage must stop, then seize him (the King) directly. This was to be done should return from the Parliament House. said, Do you consider that there are horsemen riding close to the carriage with the horses heads almost in at the window, and that any person attempting would cut pieces! then who would do il The Colonel replied, would do it with my own hand. recollect that some part of the conversation said, have weighed this matter well, and heart callous. am positive he Used such expression, and think it was after this part of the conversation about seizing the King. There was a conversation about seizing the Bank. It was agreed that the Bank should seized and the '1 ower taken I recollect they said that the arms at the Bank had been rendered useless some part being taken from them, and that they amounted to six hundred number. I think was the Colonel who said it. The convcrsation must, for the most part, have been heard by the Colonel. recollect their plan was made matter of confident success. Windsor said, give one hundred men, and I'll take the Tower myself. The Colonel went away and left us, and saw no more of him until «aw him at the Oakley Arms on the 16th of November. Lauder, the morning of that day, had been talking to me of the attack upon the Tower. wanted to know whether it would not be prudent to have a division inarch from the Tower tb New-street, Bishopsgate-street, and to secure the arms the Kast-India Company, which were deposited in their warehouses there, and to go from thence to the Artillery Ground, where they would get more arms, and secure the pieces artillery then to go forward and assist at the attack upon St. James's. also proposed that another division should march through the Borough to join the other at St. James's. said also it would be proper to have couriers who should go backwards and forward, and carry accounts the success and situation of the different bodies of the attacking army. understood that had been to secure a house where was to sit and receive these reports, and that it was the sign of the Angel, in Cecil-court, St. Marlin's-lane. Lander then asked me to write the plan down, which refused. He appeared to look strange at me. had not been sworn, and therefore was rather an object of suspicion. then said, you please will go along with you to the Colonel, and what says about it. told Lander conversation had with Gra ham Monday. said he would introduce the Colonel in the evening. That evening, as was going home with a clock, I met Broughlon : said, understand you are coining down to-night; pray do, but don't late first. said, must put my clock up first. Going along I saw Lander shutting up his shop, lie asked me was ready, I I said No. was going put up a clock, lie said was in haste, but would return soon he would wait for me. When I returned found him gone, and went myself to the Oakley Arms. 1 first went into"a little parlour, and looked round me; was asked whom wanted? said Broughton or Kussel. They told they were upstairs, and I was shewn up. hen got the parties were engaged in conversation. Colonel was standing up and speaking to the prisoner John Francis. seated myself, and had not been long so when said to me, boy, buck, we have got the completest plan in the world, will do the business without any trouble. w hat was that ? fie said to load the great gun the Park four balls or chain-shots and lire at the coach it returned from the House, aud would d d ii it would not send to Hell. This shocked much, aud I exclaimed, Good God, you consider how many people will in the Park that day, and how many lives you may take away, "lie said, d—n them, let them get out ot the way. added, it would play hell with the houses about the trea>ury. Some person said, the cannon might too low another said, it might easily raised inch : some other person said, but if it misses his Majesty Broughton replied, then him, must manhandle him. I am not certain whether had had a conversation with the Colonel before this passed; the Colonel was very near, but I cannot say he heard it: I asked Broughton whether might speaklo the Colonel, and told to it. accordingly addressed him, and said, Sir, speaking ol taking the Tower (alluding td the cony ersation at Flying said, would it not be proper have a division march from the aud so L went on, and repeated the rtliole plan. objected to it; for why—he believed one half of the India Company's mym our friends already but, good Sir/ said he, we are not sure that we can have the 'l ower, but if we have, we have every thing, for there are arms tor ; know not how many men said, but 1 know it was great number ; and said, to go the Artillery-ground would useless—what purpose would it answer ? was to annoy the associations, replied, by forming a sort of garrison, lie said, No St. Paul's would better sort of place. He said, had the Tower we had every thing, for he had that, he could from it burn down the town if necessary, and batter it lo pieces. 1 told him Graham had suggested doubts respecting the Bank, and asked him, do you think it right meddle with the Bank He said, ye*, itirely, the Bank ought the first consideration. recollect hearing some person say, that the Telegraph must destroyed. looked at the Colonel, and said, do you suppose that will necessary ? He replied, surely: for would of service to us, but of vast importance our enemies. Soon after this conversation the officers came in, and the w hole party was secured. Windsor was stranger to before saw him the Flying Morse, Newington. The examination in chief of the witness closed here. Counsel for the prisoner asked him where came from ; said was in custody, he was taken at the Onkley Arms with the others. Mr. Attorney .General.'—My Lord, this our case on the part of the Crown. A great many other witnesses were examined in the course the trial, but have endea voured to select those which w ere the most Mr. Serjeant Best then entered on the Prisoner's delence, and in a very long and elegant speech endeavoured to impress on the minds the Jury, that words did not constitute an overt act. He contended that the conviction of no man ought to rest the evidence accomplices, and that the crime should proved more credible witnesses before accomplices were admitted. They may be called to explain a transaction after a crime has been proved more credible witnesses; but I say, you allow him prove a.case which, without liim, could not be made out, you deliver every man into the hands of accomplice, and his life and character are at the mercy of so abandoned wretch." then called the following witnesses to the Prisoner's character. Lord Nel>on.—lW said he became acquainted the prisoner the year 1779. was then Lieutenant the Liverpool Blues, and his Lordship then commanded man of war— they were on the Spanish main together—they served together—they were both together the enemies trenches—they slept in the same tent, and he had an oppoi tunity of knowing all his sentiments. He was loyal man and brave officer. he had been asked ins opinion of Col. Despard, he would have said—" he is still alive he is ornament to the English army."—On cross-examination, his Lordship said; he had not seen him since the year 1730. Sir AluredClarke said, he hud known Colonel Despard for thirty years, he knew that w as much beloved by his brother officers, and the whole corps to which he belonged. Win ehe was in the government Jamaica, Colonel Despard was employed the Spanish , main. always considered him as loyal subject, and a zealous officer.—On cross-examination, he said, it was years «ince he had seen him. He never heard that he kept company with the common soldiers. The Counsel having finished, Lord Elenborough asked Colonel Despard he would himself add any thing to what had been said by his Counsel? Colonel Despard replied,—" My Lord, my Counsel have acquitted themselves with so much ability, and so entirely to my satisfaction that can Have wish say any thing." Lord Ellenborougk then spoke to the following purport: —" Gentlemen of the Jury, the evidence both sides, and the arguments Counsel being concluded, it only now remains for discharge my duty! Gentlemen, the Prisoner^tands charged with High Treason, three sorts, not very different their nature: 1st, For compassing the death of the King : next, for compassing to seize his person; and, 3dly, for conspiring to depose him,—The first of these is Treason, the statute of Edward III. the two last recent statute of the present reign. Eight distinct overt-acts are stated as evidences this intention. His Lordship here read verbatim the whole the evidence taken throughout the day. commenting upon the form of oath, he observed, that appeared on the face of it to have an ulterior purpose, which was carried by the conflict arms, and not of reason or argument; or why was there a provision to made "for the families of the heroes who should fall in the contest f* and Despard was found distributing those papers, and acting with those united in this band, it formed strong indications ot the purposes his mind. you do not believe the witnesses, then he will stand exempted from the consequences of the charge imputed to him ; but if you do believe them, then, there question upon the law, so there will none upon the fact." The Jury withdrew for about half hour, when they returned verdict Guilty," but we most earnestly recommend him mercy, on account his former good character and the services has rendered his country. Wednesday, Feb. 9. This morning the Court resumed its sittings. The prisoners having been brought to the bar, and a Jury sworn, The Solicitor General stated the case a brief and masterly manner. The witnesses were then called, and deposed nearly on.the former trial. Windsor's testimony went chiefl* to criminal*' J. Francis, Macnamara, Wood, Broughtou. Blaize said that Francis, Jfood, Tyndal, and two men, formed Committee to strike out a lan of Government, Which was to be passed for the work Executive, composed of Gentlemen. This witness also related the proposal Wood, attack his Majesty on his return from the Parliament House to Buckingham House. The reason gave for fixing this spot was, the Horse Guards left his Majesty St. James's Palace, and therefore was but slightly guarded between that and Wood thought that with select party of men would sufficiently prepared for this attempt. About 9 clock, proceedings being closed, Mr. Jekyll made a very able speech in behalf of the prisoners, after which several witnesses were called by each of tie- prisoners, who, in general, gave them good character. At one o'clock this morning the whole of the evidence for the prisoners being closed, Lord Chief Justice Ellenborough proceeded in one the most able, eloquent, and impressive addresses to the Jury ever heard, to recapitulate the charges. His Lordship's charge lasted from till C, when the Jury retired. At half past seven the Jury returned verdict of John Wood, Thomas Broughton, James Sedgwick Wrattan, John Francis, Arthur Graham, and John M'Namara LTY. Daniel Tyndall, Thomas Newman, and William Lander —Gcilty, recommended to Mercy. Thomas Phillips and Samuel Smith Not Guilty. John Doyle was abandoned by the Aftorney- General the close of the evidence, there being no testimony for conviction. Col. Despard addressed the Court to this effect:—" Lord, have only to say, that after the charge brought against; me, and of which, had not the most distant idea ; and since conviction, have had no time to consult my Solicitor on means of refuting that charge, or of destroying the credit of the witnesses adduced. have, therefore my Lord, nothing to say now but what said when brought first to this bar; oamelv. That lam Not Guilty." Lord Ellenborough in awful and impressive speech, expatiated on the enormity of their crimes, gave them no hopes of mercy, and concluded with the following words: "The same earnest advice have just given to your unfortunate Leader and Seducer, now offer to you, which is, ,to make the best use the short period life now remaining, to make your peace with an offended God for your crimes, and seek mercy another life, which the interest of your fellow creatures will not suffer extended to you here. * " The only thing now remaining for me, the painful task of pronouncing against you the awful sentence the law, which is, that you and each you be taken to the place from whence you came, and from thence you are to be drawn on hurdles the place of execution, where you are be hanged by the neck, but not until you, are dead for while you are still living, your bodies are to be taken down, your bowels torn out, and burnt before your faces ! your heads are to be then cut off, and your bodies divided each into four quarters, and your heads and quarters to then the King's disposal; and may the Almighty God have mercy on your souls."

Several articles Intelligence and ments are this week omitted owing to the length of the above State Trials.


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000361/18030228/006/0002
Salisbury and Winchester Journal - Monday 28 February 1803
EXECUTION COLONEL DESPARD, &c. 
Hung and decapitated; disembowelling/quartering remitted

EXECUTION COLONEL DESPARD, &c.

The sentence of the law has been carried into execution! The death warrant was sent to the Keeper the New Gaol in the Borough six o'clock on Satin day evening, and included the names of Colonel Despard, Thomas Broughton, John Francis, Arthur Graham, John Macnamara, john Wood, and James Sedgwick Wrattan. The three other prisoners, Newman, Tyndal, and Lander, recommended by the Jury to mercy, have been respited. As soon as the warrant for received, it was communicated to the unhappy persons Mr. Ives, the Keeper of the prison, with as much tenderness as possible. The intelligence was received by them all with resignation and fortitude. Colonel Despard observed, that the time was short; but he had no expectation that the application for mercy would effectual, Worn the moment of his conviction, lie had begun to fortify his mind to meet a public execution. Much of his time was employed in writing, some in reading, the greatest part with his wife. Mrs. Despard was greatly affected when she first heard that his fate was scaled ; but Sunday she recovered her fortitude. Accompanied by another lady, she had last interview with him about three o'clock.— The lady wept bitterly ; but first Mrs. Despard, and then the Colonel, reproached her with her weakness. Mr. and Mrs. Despard bore up with great firmness, even in parting ; and when she got into a coach, as it drove off, she waved her handkerchief out of the window.—The other prisoners bore their fate with equal hardihood, but conducted themselves with less solemnity than Colonel Despard. Their wives, &c. were allowed to take farewell of them on Sunday, and the scene was extremely distressing. Five these men attended chapel in the morning. Macnamara, being a Roman Catholic, did not attend ; neither did Colonel Despard, who has constantly refused the assistance of clergyman. After Mrs. Despard had left the Colonel, three o'clock in the afternoon, he walked up and down his cell for some time, seemingly more agitated than he had been at the period of taking leave her. Between six and seven in the evening he threw himself on the bed, and fell into a short sleep. At eight o'clock he awoke, and addressed one of the officers of the prison, who was with him, in these words :—" Me —they shall receive no " information from me—no —not for all the gifts, the " gold, and jewels, in the possession of the Crown." He then composed himself, and remained silent. He was visited in the evening by his Solicitor, who came to ask him where he wished to be buried ? He was silent for some minutes, and at length replied, that he believed several of his countrymen were buried at Pancras ; he therefpre desired to be buried there. The clergyman of the prison (Mr. Wink worth) had several times made overtures to the Colonel to commune with him ; but the Colonel always declined the clergyman's offer, politely thanking him. Mr. Winkworth repeated his request on Sunday, but received the same answer. Mr. Winkworth wished him to accept a book from him, which he also declined, saying, that was not particularly attached to any form of religion, and that his mind was entirely made up upon religious matters. Most of the other prisoners passed much of their time in prayer, and with the clergymen. Macnamara, being a Roman Catholic, was attended Roman Catholic priest. Graham, and two of the other prisoners, requested Mr. Rowland Hill to send a clergyman to them, which he did. They remained great part of the night in deep and earnest prayer. Colonel Despard slept from three to half past four; the remainder the night he passed walking up and down his cell. At four o'clock on Monday morning the drum beat at the Horse-Guards, for a signal for the cavalry to assemble. About six, there was as numerous an assemblage of spectators as could get within view of the scene. There are few houses in front of the prison ; all of them were crowded. The Dyer's grounds the left the prison, and all the parts that had a view the scaffold, were completely crammed. About 20,000 persons might be assembled, who behaved in a very orderly manner. At five o'clock St. George's bell tolled, and continued tolling for about an hour.—At half past six the prison bell rang, the signal for the unlocking of the cells. Mr. Winkworth, the Clergyman, and Mr. Griffith, the Roman Catholic Priest, the same gentleman who attended Quigley when lie was executed, came to the prison, and were immediately admitted lo the prisoners. At seven o'clock five of them, Broughton, Francis, Graham, Wood, and Wratten, went into the Chapel, Colonel Despard remaining in his cell, and Macnamara praying his cell with the Catholic Priest. The five prisoners conducted themselves with much decorum in the Chapel.— They attended to the prayers with great earnestness, but at the same time without seeming to lose that firmness which they had displayed since their trial. Before they received the Sacrament, four of them confessed they had done wrong, but not to the extent charged against them by the evidence. The fifth, Graham, said, was innocent of the charges brought against him, bat that he had attended two meetings, the second the instigation of Francis. It was Emblyn, he added, who called him to take him to the meeting, Francis's desire. For some time the Clergyman refused to administer the Sacrament to Francis, because he persisted in declaring that he had been guilty of crime. The Clergyman said to him, u You admit you attended meetings." replied, " Yes." " You knew they were for the purpose of overturning the Constitution and Government of the country. by no means wish you to enter into particulars—l only wish you to acknowledge generally."— Francis then smiled, and answered, l< admit I have done wrong in attending those meetings." During the service, and Macnamara were taken from their cells to the yard, where their irons were knocked off, and their arms and hands bound with ropes. When the other prisoners had received the Sacrament, they were brought out of the Chapel, and their irons were knocked off. The executioner then tied their arms and hands in the same manner as he had before bound Colonel Despard and Macnamara. The disembowelling and quartering the prisoners had been remitted in the warrant for their execution.— That part of the sentence which directs tiieir being taken on a hurdle was complied with, by drawing them across the yard from the (•:tapel door to the lodge, the Sheriff of Surry, the Clergyman, Constables, &c. forming procession, and the executioner sat before the prisoners with drawn sword. Macnamara and Graham went first, then Broughton and Wrattan, Wood and Francis, and lastly Despard. They were escorted by the lodge staircase up to the scaffold. Seven coffins or shells, which had been previously placed in a room under the scaffold, were brought up and placed on the platform, on which the drop was erected. A bag of saw dust, to catch the blood when the heads were severed from their bodies, was placed beside them. The block was near the scaffold. There were about one hundred spectators on the platform. It was about half past eight when the prisoners were brought up to the scaffold. As soon as the cord was fastened round the neck of one, the second was brought up, and so on till the cords were fastened round the necks all the seven. Macnamara was first brought up he still held a book in his hand, and when the cord was placed round his neck, lie exclaimed, with the greatest devotion, " Lord Jesus, have mercy upon me. Oh, Lord! look down with pity upon me." Graham came second. He locked pale and ghastly, but spoke not. Wrattcn was the third : he ascended the scaffold with much firmness. Broughton, the fourth, smiled as he ran up the scaffold stairs, but as soon as the rope was fastened round his neck he turned pale and smiled more. He joined in prayer with much earnestness. Wood was the fifth, Francis the sixth.—Francis ascended the scaffold with composure which he preserved to the last.—Wood and Broughton were equally composed. Of all of them Francis was the best looking man—tall, handsome, and well made. He and Wood were dressed in soldier's uniform—the rest were in coloured clothes. Colonel Despard was brought up the last, dressed boots, a dark brown great coat, his hair unpowdered.-— He ascended the scaffold with great firmness. His coun- tenance underwent not the slightest change during the fastening the rope round his neck, and placing the cap on his head. He looked the multitude assembled with perfect calmness. The clergyman who ascended the scaffold after the prisoners were tied up, spoke to him few words as he passed. The Colonel bowed, and thankeJ him. The ceremony of fastening the prisoners being finished, the Colonel advanced as near as he could to the edge of the scaffold, and made the following speech to the multitude " Fellow Citizens, I come here as you see, after having " served country, faithfully, honourably, and usefully served it, for thirty years and to fuffcr death " upon a scaffold tor crimc which I protest I not " pnilty. solemnly declare that lam no more guilty "ft than any of you who may be now hearing me. But, though his Majesty's Ministers know as well I do, " that I am not guilty, yet they avail themselves legal " pretext destroy man, because he has been a Iriend truth, liberty, and justice." [There was a considerable huzza from part of the populace the nearest to him. but who, from the- height of the scaffold from the ground, could not, we are sure, distinctly hear what was said.] The Colonel proceeded " Because he has been a friend to-the poor, and the oppressed. But, Citizens, " I hope and trust, notwithstanding my fate, and the fate aof those who will doubt soon follow me, that the " principles freedom, humanity, and ofjusticc, will " finally triumph over falsehood, tyranny, and delusion, 11 and every principle hostile to the interests the " race. And now, having said this, I have little more " add." [The Colonel's voice seemed to faulter little here. He paused a moment* as if had meant say something more, but had forgotten it. He then concluded in the following manner]—" I have little more add, except to wish you all health, happiness, and freedom, " which I have endeavoured, as far was in power, " to proem e for you and for mankind in genera!." The Colonel spoke firm and audible tone of vo;ce— left off sooner than was expected. There was public expression, either approbation or disapprobation given when had concluded his address. As soon as Colonel Despard had ceased speaking, the clergyman prayed with five of the prisoners. Macnamara prayed earnestly with the clergyman of his own persuasion. Despard surveyed the populace, and made short answer to some few words addressed to him by Francis, who was next him. The clergyman now shook hands with each of them. Colonel Despard bowed, and seemed to thank him he shook hands with him. The executioners,pulled the caps over the faces of the unhappy persons, and descended the scaffold —Most of them exclaimed " Lord Jesus, receive our souls !" The most awful silence then prevailed, and the thousands present with one accord stood uncovered, when, at seven minutes before nine o'clock, the signal was given, the platform dropped, and they were all launched into eternity ! Col. Despard had not one struggle; twice he opened and clenched his hands together convulsively : he stirred no more. Macnamara, Graham, Wood, and Wratten, were motionless after few struggles. Broughton and Francis struggled violently for some moments after all the rest were without motion. The executioner pulled their legs to pat an end to their pain more speedily. After hanging about half an hour till they were quite dead, they were cut down. Col. Despard was first cut down, his body placed upon saw-dust, and his head on a block. After his coat had been taken off, his head was severed from his body by persons engaged on purpose. The executioner then took the head by the hair, and carrying it the edge of the parapet on the right hand, held it up to the view the populace, and exclaimed, " This is the head of a traitor—Edward Marcus Despard." The same ceremony was performed the parapet on the left hand. There was some hooting and hissing. The Colonel's body was now put into shell prepared for it. The other prisoners were then cut down, their heads severed from their bodies, and exhibited to populace with the exclamation of-—" This is the head of another traitor." The bodies were then put into their different shells, and delivered their friends for interment. The populace were struck with the appearance Macnamara, who, on ascending the scaffold, bowed many oi them were acquainted with him; they pitied the situation of his wife, whom he had been married but a short time. The execution was over by ten o'clock, and the populace soon after dispersed quietly. The whole the awful ceremony was conducted Sir Pachard Fold and the Sheriff, with the greatest solemnity. bodies Colonel DesparJ, and Graham, were removed from the New Gaol, their friends, 011 Monday evening. Those of the other four were taken away last night. It is stated in a Paper yesterday, that several persons were last week committed to York Castle, charge of High Treason. A person was committed from the Marlborough-street Police Office, Saturday, charged with having attempted to seduce a Life Guardsman from his allegiance, and introduce him into such political societies as those Despard visited.


Sentence



Execution speech


britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000175/18030222/006/0004
Morning Post - Tuesday 22 February 1803

EXECUTION OF COLONEL DESPARD, &c.

Yesterday the execution of Despard and his six associates took place in the manner nearly in which we yesterday described. Previous to the execution some circumstances occurred which we yet must mention:

Mrs, DESPARD, after having taken leave of her husband at three o'clock on Sunday afternoon, came again about five o'clock; but it was thought advisable to spare the Colonel the pangs of a second parting, and she was therefore not admitted into the prison. She evinced some indignation at the refusal; and expressed a strong opinion with respect to the cause for which her husband was to suffer. Half frantic with leaving the prison, a part of the mob laughed at her agitation. This again provoked her resentment.

After Mrs. Despard had left the Colonel on Sunday afternoon, he walked up and down his cell for some time, seemingly more agitated than he had been at the period of taking leave of his wife. —Between six and seven in the evening he threw himself on the bed, and fell into a short sleep. At eignt o'clock he awoke, and addressed one of the Officers of the Prison, who was with him, in these words:— "Me— they shall receive no information from me — no — not for all the gifts, the gold, and jewels, in the possession of the Crown."— He then composed himself, and remained silent.

 TO DO
 
  The above expressions might induce somt to suppose that -endeavours ha».f been made to i prevail upon, him .to-^ciakc disclosures.—^—Whe- . . ther this was th^ case or .-nor, we are not able to say. Sir RiCfcA>r> Fq*t> was at the prison on Sunday, and we believe saw the Colorifl and all the other prisoners, but.'«*re have not heard that his visit bad for its object to induce them to make any confessions, i i\ftti Mrs. JDsspAß|>.had left the Colonel, he svas visited in the evening by the Gentleman who had afted as his Solicitor, who came to ask him where he wished to be buried i He was silent for some minute* , audit length replied, that he believed- several et his countrymen were buried at J?ftncras : fee therefore desired to be buried rhire. The Clergyman ofthe Prison, Mr. Wikk'wor-th, had several times nude overtures to the Colonel-to commune with him. But the Colonel always de. etiued tag Clergyman's offer, politely, however, tkanking him. Mr. W i x s.wo i r « on Sunday re. ?? his request, but received the same a&swer. Vt- Wimcworth wished him to accept 'Wbook (ror% him, whirh he also declined. The Colonel, we understand, szid, that he was uot particularly at- tached to any form of religion, and that his mind was entirely made up upon religious matters. Most o» the other prisoners, however, passed much of their time in prayer, and with the elergy- ms'ti. Majckavasa, being a Reatar. Catholic, was attended by a Roman- Catholic priest. Gram am, and two of the other prisoners, requested Mr. Rowla^p Hui. to send a clergyman to them, _ which b> did. They remained great part of the aigbi in d.vp and earnest prayer. When Mr. Ives went to communicate the war- rant for execution to two of the prisoners, Wood and Gbah.im, they said, that they wished to have some conversation with hira. On Sunday afternoon, he went to them, attended by die clergyman, Mr. WijiatwoaTM. Graham then entered into a long conversation with him, upon the. motives of the meeting at the public-house where, they were appre- hrmir.i ; but we do not Irani that he threw any new light upon the subject, or made any discoveries of importance. Macnamaka spent the whole of the night in prayer. The Roman Catholic Priest left him at a Lvtehour on Sunday night, and came again early yes- terday morning. Gx a h am, W r at t e n , and another, Wood we believe, were the greater part of the night engaged in a similar manner — they were Dis- senters. Brouchton and Francis were of the Cimrxh of England persuasion. Col. Despard slept from three to half past four ; the remainder of . the night he passed in walking up and down his cell. The rest of the prisoners slept about two hours. AH the arrangements for the execution were set- tled on Sunday by Sir Richard Ford and the She- riff of Surrey, with the Government ar.d the magi- strates. Sir Richard Vo\d slept on Sunday right at Mr. Carpenter Smith's, in order to be near the prison. At four o'clock yesterday morning the drum beat at the Horse-guards, tor a signal for the cavalry to assemble. We understand that four regiments were on duty. Two troops of horse were stationed at the Obelisk.- Others patrolcd the reads from the" Obelisk to the Elephant and Casrie, and down the Borough road. The military occupied their sta- tions as soon as it was day light. It was not till past seven o'clock that persons began .to pour. in any numbers along the Westminster and City ?>.oids to Horseruonger-lane. About eight there was a very numeious assemblage, as numerous as that narrow lane could contain. There are few hvuees ia front of the prison ; all of them, however, were crowded with, spectators* — The Dyer's grounds to the right of the prison were gradually niied, tiH at last all the parts that had a view of the scaffold were completely crammed. We- suppose that 20,000 persons might be assembled. — ■ They behaved in a vtry crekrly manner. At rive o'clock St. George's bell toiled, and continued toiling for, about an hour. At half past six the prison bell rang, the signal for the unlocking of the cells. Mr. Winkworth, the Clergyman, and Mr. Griffith, the Roman Catholic Priest, the same Gentleman who attended QjncLKY when he was executed for treason at Maidstone, came to the prison, ar.d were immedi- ately admitted to the prisoners. At seven o'clock five of them, Brouc.hton, Francis, Graka.v, Wood, and Wratten, went into the Chapel ; Colonel Dkspard remain- ing in his cell ; and Macvamara prayingin his cell with the Roman Catholic priejt. The five pri- soners conducted themselves wish much decorum in the Chapel. They attended to the prayers with great earnestness, but at the same time without seeming to lose that firmness which they had displayed since their trial 1 .Bciore they received the sacrament, four of them confessed they had done wrong, but not to the j extent charjjedj again&t them by the evidence, The fifth, Ghaham, said, lie was innocent of the ?? brought against him, but that he had attended two meetings, the second at the instigation of Fran- cis. It was F.mjilyn, he added, who called on him to take him to the meeting, by Francis's desire. For some time the clergyman refused to adminisrei the sacrament to Franc is, because he persisted in declaring that he had been guilty of no crime. — The clergymau said to him, " You admit you at - tended ineecifes." He replied, '"Yes.'* "You knew they were for the purpose of overturn- ing the Constitution and Government of the Country. I by no means wish you to enter into particulars— -1 only wish you to acknow- ledge generally." Faa-NCis then smiled, it seemed to be the natural character of his countenance ; he answered, " I admit I have done wronj* in attend, ing those meetings." The Clergyman then asked each of them, " how they found themselves i" Francis, Wood, Brouchton, and Wratten, said, " they were never happier in their lives." Gsaham remained silent. The sacrament was then adftiinistered to them. The service in the chapel lasted three quarters of 2h hour. Before it was over Colonel Desparo Ind Mac samara were brought down from their cells. Their irons were knocked off, and their arms and hands bound with ropes. Despard walked up and down before the chapel door, but did not enter the chapel. Macnamara walked about in earnest conversation with thr-. Roman Catholic Tricst, and with a book in his hand. Whilst D2SPAR.O was at the door of the chapel, the Sheriff, Mr. Prfpsr, addressed himscif very hamanely to him, and asked him if he could render him any service? The Colonel thanked him, and re- plied that he could not. The Sheriff added something in a low tone of voice, which, we believe, but are. Cot quite certain, related to Mrs. Despard. Whilst the clergyman was gone out of the chapel to pre- pare for the sacrament, the fi»c prisoners in the chapel rose, on hearing the -Colonel's irons being knocked off near th> door. They asked each other " Where is he ?" arid teemed anxious to see him. After they hid. received the sacrament they were b, fought out of the chapel, and their irens were inociced o*f. The executioner then tied their arms and hand* in the same manner as lie had before bound Colonel DwrAtP and Macnamara. Notice was then given to the Sheriff diat they were ready. Colonel Despakd, who stood the 1 first, retired behind, and motioned to FraKcis, who was making way for him, to go before him.^- The hurdle had been previously prepared in the outer Court-yard. It v the body of a small cart, ca which two trusses of clean straw are laid. It ■was drawn by two horses. The procession moved ia the following order : — Tiie SherirT of Surry, The ClertfVnisn in his Ro&es, Mr. Ives, the Keeper, x-ith a White Wanj; B'ifjn Ccustablc, Other Constables, The F.xecutioner, with 2. Drawn Sword • mac::am.ara nd graham, in the H ?? : The Hurdle returned, a:>J brought in thestme Order of ?ioc*ssion, BROUGHTON* and WRATTEN; Next, WOOD and ERANCIS; Last!? COLONEL DESPARD. Each division was drawn across the Court-yard ; an iron gate opened, which brought them to the in- side cf the outer gate, from whence they ascended a staircase to the top of the building, on which the droo was creeled. — Macnamara seemed intent upon the book in his hand. Graham remained silent. Brouch- ro.v jumped into the hurdle, smiled, and looked up to the scaffold. Wooo and Francis both smiled ; and all of them surveyed the awful scene with much composure. — Da spar d shook hands with a Gentleman, as he got into the hurdle, and looked up to the scaffold with a smile. As scon as the prisoners were placed on the hurdles, St. George's bell tolled for sometime. It was about half past eight when the prisoners welt' brought up to the scaffold one by erne. As scon as they had all been conveyed in the hurdle to the staircase that leads to the scaffold, they were escorted up one by one — the Sheriff, Sir Richard Ford, the Clergyman, Mr. WiN'a- worth, the Roman Catholic Clergyman, Mr. Griffith, preceding them. Seven coffins, or shells which had been previously placed ih an upper room, were brought up and placed on the rcof, on which the drop was erected. A bag of saw-dust to catch the blood when the heads, were severed from their bodies, was placed beside them. The block was near the scaffold*. There were about *he hundred spectators on the platform, of whom one half were peace-officers. — Macmanus and Townsend were among them. AmOng the spectators were two sons of the Earl of Uxbridge, and the Hon. Captain Upton and his brother. The roof of the building is about fifty feet by thirty, quite flat, and covered with copper. It is about the height of an ordinary second floor. On this roof the platform, or, as it is vulgarly called, the drop, was erected. The platform was about eight feet high, and the gallows was just of sufficient length to contain the seven sufferers. The peace -officers on the roof were stationed two deep close round the platform. The most perfect order prevailed. . As soon as the cord was fastened round the neck of one, the second was brought up, and >o on till the cords were fastened round the necks of all the seven. Macnamara was first brought up ; he still held a book in his hand, and .vhen the cord was placed round his neck, he exclaimed, with the greatest de- votion, " Lord Jesus, have mercy upon me ! Oh ! Lord, look down with pity upon me." Graham came second. He looked pale and ghastly, but sooke not. Wratten was the third : he ascended the scaf- fold with much firmness. Broughton the fourth, smiled as he ran up the scaffold stairs, but as soon as the rope was fastened i round his neck he turned pale and smiled no more, j He Joined in prayer with much earnestness. He was a dark, ill-locking man, like a gypsey. Wood was the fifth, Francis the sixth. — j Francis ascended the scaffold with a composure! which he preserved to the last. — Wooo and Brovchton were eaually composed. Of all of' tfce#F%*K.Crt WM tl*e Itii Ibokii.g — fall, ksr-d- -some, arid well made* lie and Wood were- drc^ed. in soldier's uniform. The rest were in coloured clothes. Colonel Despard was brought up fbe last, dressed in boots, a dark brown great coat, his hair unpowdered. As each appeared on the platform a buzz pre- vailed throughout the mob, and particularly when the soldiers red jackets were seen. Early in the morning Colonel Despard desired to speak with the Sheriff and Sir Richard Foro, to whom he communicated his wish to address the spectators. — They told him they had not the least objection to his carrying that wish into effect. The Colonel ascended the scaffold with great firm- ness. His countenance underwent not the slightest change, while the awful ceremony of fastening the rope round his neck, and placing the cap on his head, was performing. He looked at the multitude assembled with perfect calmness. The Clergyman who ascended the scaffold after the prisoners were tied up, spoke to him a few words as he passed. — The Colonel bowed, and thanked him. j The ceremony of fastening the prisoners being I finished, the Colonel advanced to the edg£ of the scaffold, as nearly as the rope by which he was tied up would allow, and made the following speech to the multitude : — " Ff.li.ow Citizens, X I come here as you see, nfter having serv- " ed my country, faithfully, honourably, and " usefully served it, for thirty years and up- " wards, to suffer death upon a scaffold for a crime "of which I protest lam not guilty. I solemnly " declare that I am no more guilty of it than " any of you who may be now hearing me. — " But, though His Majesty's Ministers know as i " well as I do, that I am not guilt;/, yet they ** avail themselves of a legal pretext to destroy a i " man, because he has been a friend to truth, to . " liberty, and to justice." (There was a consi- derable huzza from part of the populace the nearest to him, but who, from the height of the building from the ground, could not, we are sure, distinctly hear what was said.) The Colanel proceeded : — " Because I have been a friend to the poor, and " the oppressed. But, Citizens, I hope and trust, ' c notwithstanding, my fate, and the fate of those, t( who no doubt will soon follow me, that the prin- rl ciplei of freedom, of humanity, and of justice, " wiH finally triumph ov-er falsehood, tyranny, and v delusion, and every principle hostile to the inter- " ests of the human race. And now having said " this, I have little more to add." (The Colonel's voice seemed to falter a little here. He paused a moment as if he had meant to say some- thing more, but had forgotten it. He then con- cluded in the following manner — " I have lirtit " more to add, except to wish your.ll health, hap- " pihCss, zrvi freedom, which I have endeavoured, r * as far as was in zny pewer, to procure for you ff end for mankind in general." The spoke in a firm and audible tone of voice*— he left off sooner than was expected. There was no public expression, either cf approbation or d.iapprobation given when he had concluded his address. . . As *««nas Cololtel Dcpard had ceased speak- ing, the Clergyman prayed with five ofthe priso- ners. Macnamaha prayed earnestly with the 1 Clergyman of his own persuasion. Degpap.d sur- veyed the populace, and made a short answer, which we could no: hear, to some fee/ word; addressed to him by Francis, who was next him. The Clergyman now shook hands with each of them. Cclonel Dlspard bowed, and seemed to thank him as he shook hands with him. The execu- tioners pulled the caps over the faces of the un- happy persons and descended the scaffold. — Most of them exclaimed l( Lord Jesus receive our souls ! " The last and most dreadful part of the ceremony was now to be performed. The most awful silence prevailed, and the thousands present all with one ac- cord stood uncovered. At seven minutes before nine o'clock the signal was given, the platform dropped, and they were all launched into eternity ! ! The noise ofthe platform, and sinking of the unfortunate men, were heard and seen by the populace - r they spread the most perfect silehce in an instant., As the prisoners sunk down, they were heard to. say, in a general but low excla- mation, " the Lord have mercy on us." 'Col. Despard had not one struggle: twice he opened and clenched his hands together convulsively -. he stirred no more. Macnamara, Graham, Wood, and Wrat- T£.n, were motionless after a few struggles. Broughton and Francis struggled violently for some moments after all tho rest were without mc tion. The executioner pulled their legs to put an end to their pain more speedily. Macnamara huag at the left extremity, and Colonel Despard at the right, the soldiers next to him. Tllis was the order : B <« V • a c s 3 p£s £ « | •i -9 -5 •* -C -z x-\ After hanging about half an hour till they were quite dead, they were taken down. Colonel Des- -I'ard was first taken down,, his body placed upon saw-dust, and his head on a block. After his coat had been r>kcn off, his head was severed by a knife and saw from his body by persous from St. Tho- mas's Hospital, engaged on purpose to perform that task. The executioner then took the head by the hair, and carrying it to the edge of the parapet on the right hand, hehi it up to the view of the populace, and exclaimed, " This is the head of a traitor — Edward Max. crs Despard." The same ceremony was performed at the parapet on the left hand. There was some hooting and his- sing when the Colonel's head was exhibited. ihe Colonel's body was now put into the shell thnt had been prepared for it. The o v.:r prisoners were then cut down, their heads 3 v *ve ed iiorn their bodies,' and exhibited to the populace with the same exclamation cf— " this .s th' h.al of a another traitor." The taking down and beheading of each occupied aoout five minute*. ly- bodies were then put infb theiV di«. r?11 . steiis,- aiidaxc to be' delivered to thais;^^. ** interment. The seven shell*, laying ode by C? 1^ -were left on the top of the building. J The populace were struck with the XDt» 3r -, r ACNAiiARA, who, on ascending the sc?#h bowed, many of them were acquainted wirh— "' they pitied the situation of his wife, :o , , ".' '*■ he had been married but a short time; ?? ?? :l at first thought he was Colonel D?.if K The crowd at the entrance or Ilorseinori tfr^T" was immense — as the time of execution aV-V ""' :e the people from all parts came fcith such f,. ?? T ' to bear down all opposition. Those who had lv ' - $ dry situations were pushed into the middh- o i- ?? n ,n where they stood almost up to the knees i n J^ Several lost their shoes by the continual »J>k"- and jostling. Many fainted, both men ;:nd worn» ?? of the latter, however, there 'were but few \vt • the execution was going forward, me pocularp . • off their hats. ' ?? The execution W2S over by ten o'dort , i , populace soon arte; dispersed quietly. yL. not the least tendency to riot or' disturbanc The precautions, however, taken by Gov-»r«-*~ were certainly proper. We understand th- sky-rocket was sent to the keeper of the tQ be let off, as a signal to the military, ' m V . !f- -any disturbance. °* The whole of the awful ceremony was cend fl 4 by Sir Richard Foku and the Sheri*? «•• i . greatest solemnity. " ' Macnamara was .50 years of ajK, ~ JVV . c six inches high, born in Irehod, ty tradaacai^nte? Wood, *6 years cf age, about 5 feet lynches high, born in Derbyshire, 3 soldier. Francis, 23 years of age, about 5 feet 10 ir-h c « ■high, born in Shropshire, a soldier and shoemaker* Brocghton, 2* years of age, about 5 fee t 6i inches high, born in London, a carpenter. Graham, 53 years of age, about 5 feet 10 inches hign, born in London, a slater, Waatten, 35 years of age, 5 feet 9 inches high place of birth not known, a shoemaker. They were all strong, well-proportioned men, a J j all married. Government hearing that 'Cclonel Despard employed his time wholly in writing, sent an order to Mr. Ives to intimate to him, that privherc would net be allowed him, without he permit ted the keeper to sec what he wrote. Mr. Ivr.s went to him on the day he received his instruction (Thais. day noon;' and told him .the .orders he had received. The Colonel replied, ** I have no sort of obj. ftion to your seeing what I write." The conduct of Colonel Despard on all occasion was the same ; with respeft to religion, he : a;J ••■> the Clergyman who waited on him after the ?? " I have made up my mind on religion ; I h:.s long looked upon it in its proper light ; ?? is in mv own brea.t." The following is an extract of the Wauakl tor Execution : " And weerexi we have thought fit to remit urrof :hc sentence, v;z. taking oat v.ud burning their ?? been tlieir races, and dividing the bodies eftJu-irJ y.Jcr. r*. pjrfi, J. Ited, J. ¥rvich r Tho. rougtfo.v, J. tegwick It n*. ten, A.Graifam, a.id y. \\ccKumirn, seivraij;. »zo touraam, oar will and pkaitire i.,, tut execution * ?? iw>n the j i t. f^rd ?? ; Dcgard, J. Wood J. f««i,, rW their being dx^y.w aad hacked, aud bavi tacit heads smiM from their bodies, aceorJij^ to tbe saiu sentence only, utbe usual place or' Lx utiun, on Jkfcntfcr» next, the si it day f February; and for so dcine' this shall be your Warna. Given at our Courr a: St. ?? this i6:h thy of r'core- ary, 18-53, in the 43d year oi'our Reign, by KisMAjisrv $ Comnmiar.u. (Signed] ** P£iHAM.» To cur trusty and well-beloved S:uk.ijj of the County or S Try, a.id others whom it may concern. Annexed is a Copy cf the Order for the Rwpite. " Sir, " mitt&dl, TJ,. ?? :Soj. " I am co;nir.andc:i to signify toyou the Kino's ?? tlint the txecutioo of the S.tntepct of Death pa»ed :: Tbomto XnvmasT, faimrl Tyndtl! t and Jf «///f« Lwirr, now J the Gaol tor the County o: Surry, fee respited uaril furtte ;:guiij.ai.»» 1 of His Maj£3 i "i 'i picaiurc. 4 ' 1 am, Sir, vouur most oicdient ?? srrvant, (Signed; " PiiHAM."

To our trusty, &. &c.


--

Advert
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002429/18030329/003/0001

https://archive.org/details/trialedwardmarc00britgoog
The trial of Edward Marcus Despard for high treason: at the Session House, Newington, Surry, on Monday the seventh of February, 1803
by Despard, Edward Marcus, 1751-1803; Gurney, Joseph, 1744-1815; Gurney, William Brodie, 1777-1855
Publication date 1803

Thornbury told the tale in Old Stories Re-Told



RECALLED ALSO


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000464/18650304/009/0002
Paisley Herald and Renfrewshire Advertiser - Saturday 04 March 1865

REMARKABLE TRIAL AND EXECUTION OF COLONEL DESPARD.

The trial and execution of Colonel Despard for treason, in 1803, excited great interest at the time, and the causes which led Colonel Despard to the scaffold possess historic interest which entitles his story to prominent place in the annals of crime. Edward Marcus Despard was a native of Queen's County, Ireland. He entered the army in early life, and served with fidelity and distinction. the close of the American War of Independence he was stationed in the West Indies, where he acquired credit by an expedition to the Spanish main. At the close of the Nootka Sound affair, he had reached the rank of lieutenant-colonel in the 79tli Regiment, and held the office of superintendent Honduras. Some part of his conduct giving offence to the settlers, complaints were forwarded against him, upon which he was suspended and sent home. He applied to Government for an investigation of his conduct, which was rejected, as were also his claims. This naturally irritated him, and conceiving that, at least, he hail a right to a fair hearing, in nis disappointment and soured feelings he became a violent democrat, renounced his allegiance, and engaged in traitorous projects against the State. These objects were soon, in part, revealed. Colonel Despard, being arrested on suspicion, was immured for three years in the prison of Cold Bath Fields. His treatment during this captivity was unnecessarily harsh, and on several occasions complained of and discussed in the House of Commons. On his release, it was evident that his temper had given way under a sense of his wrongs, real or imaginary, and that his intellect, to certain extent, was disordered. He frequented low ale-houses in London, and leagued himself with some of the refuse of society. With these he formed a plot, cemented by an oath of secrecy, to murder the King and Royal Family, and to seize the Tower, the Bank, and other public offices. His idea was to load the great gun the park with grapeshot, to surround it suddenly with a band of the conspirators when the King went to open Parliament, in November, 1802, ana to discharge the deadly missiles at the Royal carriage as it passed—an exaggerated anticipation of Fieschi's infernal machine plot in 1835. One conspirator, less diabolically savage than his associates, observed that the lives of many innocent persons would thereby be destroyed. ' Let them keep out of the way,' said Despard. Some of the gang turned King's evidence, the worst of all classes of witnesses—necessary evils ; but in treasonable cases frequently the only ones that can be obtained, and they are seldom wanting. Few confederates of conspiracy have the constancy of the Athenian courtezan, of whom it is recorded that she cut her tongue out, that no pressure might place it in her power to betray the plot against the Pisistratidae, which had been revealed to her. The ministers received timely notice of Colonel Despard's plans, and took their measures accordingly. On the 20tli of November, three days before the day fixed for the ltoyal procession, a strong party of the London, Surrey, and Kent patrols surrounded the Oakley Arms, a small public-house in Laml>eth. There Despard, and thirty-two of his confederates, all of the lowest class, were seized. On the 7th of February, a special commission assembled for their trial, at which Lord Ellenborough presided. Best, afterwards Chief Justice and Lord Wynford, was retained by Despard as his leading counsel. He summoned many witnesses to character, amongst others Lord Nelson and Sir Alfred Clarke. Lord Nelson deposed that he had served with the prisoner on the Spanish main at the attack of Fort St Juan, in 1780, and that he bore the character of a brave officer, well as of an honourable and loyal man. Lord Ellenborough, adverting to this testimony in summing up, observed that it had been given by ' a man on whom to pronounce eulogy were to waste words.' Lord Nelson says, in a letter Alexander Davison, wTitten the day after—' I was at Colonel Despard's trial yesterday, subpoened by him for a character. I think the plot deeper than was imagined; but as to the extent, nothing but the Guards have come out.' This last paragraph was in allusion to two of the arrested conspirators being privates in the Guards, and seized in uniform. It was thought more of their comrades were implicated. The evidence produced before the Court was clear and positive. Colonel Despard and six of his associates, the two soldiers included, were found guilty of high treason, and sentenced to be hanged and beheaded. The jury strongly recommended him to mercy, we may presume on the score of his former services and loyalty. On Monday, Feb. the 21st, the execution took place on the top of the new jail in Horsemonger Lane, in the borough. When the warrant was delivered on the preceding Saturday it was communicated to the condemned prisoners by the keeper of the prison, Mr Ives, with as much humanity as the nature of the case required. It was expected by all, and received with fortitude. Colonel Despard observed that the time was short; but he never expected from the first that the recommendation of the jury would be effectual. From the moment of conviction he had begun to prepare himself for the hour that would close all sublunary scenes upon him for ever. During the whole of the interval between sentence and execution he behaved with composure, and gave no indications of unsettled intellect. portion of his time he employed in writing, some in reading, and the greater part in conversation with his wife. Mrs Despard was greatly affected when she received the first intelligence that his fate was sealed; but on Sunday she recovered her fortitude, and accompanied another lady, had last interview with her husband about three o'clock. The lady wept bitterly ; but first Mrs Despard, and then the Colonel, reproached her with her weakness. The husband and wife bore with great firmness even at the parting; and when she got into a coach, as it drove off, she wared her handkerchief out of the window. The other prisoners waited their fate with equal hardihood, but conducted themselves with less solemnity than Colonel Despard. Their wives and other relatives were allowed to take leave of them on Sunday. The scene was extremely distressing. Five of these men attended the chapel within the jail on Sunday morning. Macnamara, being a Roman Catholic, did attend, neither did Colonel Despard, who constantly refused the assistance of clergyman. Mrs Despard having taken leave of her husband at three o'clock on Sunday afternoon, came again alxmt five; but it Mas thought advisable to spare both the pangs of a second parting, and she was therefore not admitted into the prison. She evinced some indignation at the refusal, and expressed strong opinion with respect to the cause for which her husband was suffer. After Mrs had left the Colonel on Sunday he walked up ana down his cell for some time, seemingly more agitated than had been at the moment leave-taking. Between six and seven he threw himself the bed, and fell into a short sleep. At eight o'clock he awoke and addressed one of the officers of the prison who was with him in these words : —' Me! They shall receive no information from me—no, not for all the gifts, the gold, and jewels in the possession of the Crown !' He then composed himself and remained silent. The above expressions led to supposition that endeavours had been made to prevail upon him to make disclosures. Later in the evening _ was visited the gentleman who acted as his solicitor, who came to ask where he wished to be buried. After some delil>eration, he replied that believed several of his countrymen lav in St Churchyard, and there he desired to be interred. The clergyman of the prison, Winkworth, had several times made overtures to the Colonel to commune with him. This he declined with courtesy. On Sunday lie repeated the request, but received the same denial. Mr W inkworth wished him then to accept a book, which he also declined. He was understood to have said that he was not particularly attached to any form of worship or faith, and that his mind was entirely made upon religious matters. He slept soundly until half-past four on Monday morning, and passed the remainder of his time in walking up and down his cell. At live o'clock St George's bell began to toll, and continued for about an hour. half-past six the prison bell rang —the signal for unlocking the cells. Mr Winkworth, and Mr Griffith, the Roman Catholic priest—the same gentleman who had attended upon Quigly when he was executed—came to the prison, and were immediately admitted to the condemned. At seven o'clock five of them went into the chapel. Colonel Despard remained in his cell, and Macnamara in his, praying with the minister of his persuasion. The five conducted themselves with much decorum in the chapel. They joined in the prayers with earnestness, and severally received the Sacrament. The service in the chapel lasted three quarters of an hour. Before it was over Colonel Despard and Macnamaia were brought down from their cells. Their irons were knocked off, and their arms and hands bound with ropes. Despard walked up and down before the chapel door, but did not enter. Macnamara remained in earnest conversation with the priest, and with a book iii his hand. After the live had received the Sacrament they were brought out of the chapel and their irons removed. The executioner then tied their arms and hands in the same manner as he had before bound Despard and Macnaniara. Notice was then given to the Sheriff that they were ready. Colonel Despard, who stood the first, retired behind, and motioned to Francis, who was making way for him, to precede. The hurdle had been previously prepared in the court-yard. Macnamara and Graham were first put into it, and drawn to the lodge, where the inner gates were opened, and they were conveyed to the staircase leading up to the scaffold. The liurdle returned, and brought Broughton and Wrattan, then Wood and Francis. Last of all, Colonel Despard was put into it alone. He shook hands with a gentleman as he got in, and looked up to the fccaffold with a smile. During this part of the awtful ceremony the bell of St George's tolled again. On reaching the staircase the prisoners were escorted up one by one. As soon the cord was fastened round the neck of one the second appeared, and so on, until all seven stood in a row. Macnamara was the first. He still held lx>ok his hand, and when lie felt the cord, exclaimed, with the greatest devotion, ' Lord Jesus, have mercy upon me !' Graham came second. He looked pale and ghastly, but spoke not. Wrattan was the third, and exhibited perfect selfpossession. Broughton, the fourth, smiled as he ran lightly up ; but when the rope was placed on his neck he turned pale and smileu no more. Wood and Francis, in their military uniforms, were the fifth aud sixth. They stood composed. Francis was the bestlooking of all—tall, handsome, and a manly figure. Exactly at nine the signal was given, the platform dropped, and the seven associated conspirators were launched into eternity. Despard died without a struggle. His hands opened and clenched twice convulsively, but no other movement was perceptible. Macnamara, Graham, Wood, and Wrattan were motionless in a few minutes. Broughton and Francis struggled violently. The executioner pulled their legs to put them out of pain. After a lapse of rather more than half an hour they were cut down, Colonel Despard the first. His body was placed on sawdust, and his head upon a block. After his coat had been taken off, the head was severed by persons engaged expressly for the purpose. The executioner then took the head by the hair, and carryii it to the edge of the parapet on the right hand, held it up to the view of the populace, and exclaimed, 'This is the head of traitor, Edward Marcus Despard.' The same ceremony was performed at the parapet on the left hand. There were hooting and hisses, from disapprobation of the spectacle, when the colonel's head was exhibited. The heads were then severed from the bodies of the rest, and displayed, with the same exclamation, 'This is the head of another traitor!' They were then placed in different shells, to be delivered to any friends who might claim them for interment. Scottish Journal.