# Misc Luddite Notes 1812


1812
Nottingham (et al) Lent assizes, march 1812, lots of Luddites tried; law making machine breaking a capital punishment to follow

May 1812 Chester special commission https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2012/05/30th-may-1812-results-sentencing-of.html
? Lancaster Special Commission https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2012/05/29th-may-1812-trials-of-thomas-brookes.html



Threatening letter to Vickerman 1812 https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2012/03/before-15th-march-1812-threatening.html


----


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18120229/011/0003
Leeds Mercury - Saturday 29 February 1812

MACHINERY DESTROYED

It is with deep regret we have to state that outrages of a most alarming description and extent, have been recently committed in the neighbourhood of Huddersfield. On the night ot Saturday iast, a number of persons assembled near the premises of Mr. Joseph Hirst, of Marsh, with their faces blacked, and their persons in other respects disguised, and having forcibly obtained admittance in to the dressing ships, proceeded to destroy all the machinery used in the dressingof cloth such as dressing frames, shears, and other implements used in what is commonly call Gig Mills, the whole of which they completely demolished. Ihe same, or a similar party then proceeded to tbe workshops of Mr. Jamnes Baldersun, of Crossland Moor, in which machinery of the same description was employed, in which they committed similar depredations, completely destroying or rendering useless the whole of the machinery. The maanner in which these outrages were perpetrated, was this—The depredators, or to use the cant terms, Luddites, assemble wvth as much privacy as possible, at the place marked out for attack, and divide themseives into two parties, the more daring and expert of which enter the premises, provided with proper implements for the work of destruction, which they accomplish a with astonishing secrecy and dispatch. The other party remain conveniently stationed at the outside of the building, to keep off all intruders, or to give the alarm, if a superior force, was likely to be opposed to them. As soon as the work of destruction was completed, the Leader drew up his men, called over the roll, each man answering to a particular number instead of his name; they then fired off their pistols, (for they were armed,) gave a shout, and marched otf in regular military order. They do not appear to have done any mischief besides breaking the machinery; and one of the party having asked the Leader what they should do with one of the Proprietors, lhe replied, not hurt a hair of his head; but that should they be under the necessity of visiting him again, they could not shew him any mercy.

The depredations appeared to the Magistrates to be of so alarming a nature, as to induce them to apply to General Vyse, of Beverley, for military aid, who dispatched an express to this town, with an order for the Troop of Scotch Greys stationed in this town, to proceed imediately to Huddersfield, and which marched at 11 o'clock on Monday night, for that place. And it not being thought expedient to leave this town without military, a squadron ot Cavalry was marched from Sheffield, and arrived about nine o'clock on Tuesday morning, and in the afternoon of the same day, a squadron of the 2nd Dragoon Guards, arrived from York, and on Wednesday proceeded to Huddersfield, to relieve the Scotch Grey's who returned to this town on Thursday. The Cavalry from Sheffield left this place on Thursday morning. These military movements have naturally created much anxious curiosity, but no disptsition has been evinced in this neighbourbood, to disturb the publie peace.

On Wednesday night, notwithstanding the presence of the Military, a party broke imto a Mill situated between Slaithwate and Huddersfield, and carried on their work of destruction there in a similar trannor.


---
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002131/18120418/031/0003
Nottingham Journal - Saturday 18 April 1812

We lament to state new disorders in the neighbourhood of Leeds. The following are the particulars, given in a letter:

"Heckmondwike, April 12.—On rising this morning found the rioters had attacked Mr. Cartwright's mill at the Rawfolds, just beyond Little Town, who is, it seemed, a very spirited man, and was well prepared for them, having himself, with eight soldiers, slept in the mill for some time, and had well barricaded it. It was secured on the back by the dam; breast-works of large flag-stones were put before the windows, leaving apertures for those inside to put their firelocks through. A sentinel was placed on the outside, whom the rioters surprised and disarmed. In the mill all were asleep, bus one, when the attack commenced. Mr. C. with true courage, said, "Now, my lads, they are come, be steady." His party being placed behind the flag-stones, he went to the middle window and fired (as he saw occasion) from side to side. The soldiers say, they never saw a man fire and load so fast. The rioters finding they could not get the door down with their hatchets and hammers, nearly shot it down. It was expected they would soon enter, when Mr. C. ordered the soldiers to fix bayonets, declaring he would shoot the first that flinched; but the invaders soon drew off, and disappeared. Some are supposed to be thrown into the dam, and two, wounded, were lying near the building, one with a leg broken (by a shot), which was soon after amputated, and he survived but a very little time. It is said, he is a clergyman's son, about 19, apprentice to a tinner, at Huddersfield. The other was from Halifax, and had a bullet, which took off part of the flesh of his arm, entered his chest, and went through. Mr. ——— saw him ahout 12 o'clock, when he seemed dying, and it is said he is since dead; but made no confession. We hope this will deter from further proceedings. They are known to each other by numbers, not by name. Other mills in the neighbourhood are guarded in a similar manner, and the proprietors, encouraged by this example, are determined to make the most vigorous resistance."

Another letter from a gentleman at Halifax, to his friend in this neighbourhood, dated April 14, says, "The *Luddites*, for so we have begun to call them, have met with a rebuff in this neighbourhood: Mr. Cartwright, late of this town, now of Cleckheaton, has had his mill in a state of defence for some time past; on Saturday night, or rather Sunday morning, it was attacked; Mr. Cartwright and his friends were prepared, and a smart engagement took place for about eighteen minutes, in which time Mr. C.'s men fired 140 cartridges. The cavalry then came up, and the assailants were dispersed. Two of them were left severely wounded, one in the thigh, the other in the breast. The former submitted to amputation, but died in an hour after the operation; the other died also in the course of the day: both sullenly refused to give any information.—Blood has been traced two or three miles from the place, in various directions, since the flight of the insurgents, and a finger has been picked up. It is hoped that so firm and successful a resistance will stop the progress of these deluded men in their lawless aggressions.—Mr. Cartwright is a spirited man, and has been in the army."

A spirit of riot and disorder has been manifested at Sheffield, in consequence of the high price of provisions and want of employment. On Tuesday last a large mob of men, women, and children, assembled in the principal streets, and as if conformity to some previously concerted plan, the whole body rushed with violent exclamations to the Town Magazine, which they forced open, and carried off, or destroyed, in a few seconds, the whole of the arms and ammunition, &c. on which they could lay their hands, belonging to the Local Milita. The Magistrates, however, exerted themselves so successfully in quelling the tumult, that no further mischief has been done. A strong military force is kept on duty.

Some acts of violence, from the same causes, lave also this week been offered by the weavers - at Stockport.


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18120314/008/0003
Leeds Mercury - Saturday 14 March 1812

YORKSHIRE LENT ASSIZES

...

Mr. Justice Le BLANC addressed the Grand Jury in nearly the following terms:—

"GENTLEMEN OF THE GRAND JURY,  
"Assembled as we are at present in the ordinary discharge of a duty you have so often been called upon to perform; I should have felt it unnecessary to trouble you with any observations if a case had not occurred which seemed from its infrequency to require some notice. The list of offences, though somewhat longer than usual, does not appear to contain many cases of novelty, and I hoped to have had the pleasure of congratulating the County of York in having escaped the contagion of that system of depredation which has continued so long and occasioned such extensive mischief in a neighbouring county, but this hope has not been fully realised; I am grieved to find from a case in the Calendar, and from information received since we arrived here, that this county has not entirely escaped the influence of bad example; but I trust there will be found not only sufficient vigilance in the magistracy to suppress these disorders; but, also courage in the subjects, to protect their property from the attacks of these depredators. The advantages of machinery in manufacture has been so clearly proved, and the subject so ably discussed, that it excites surprize that any should be found so ignorant and infatuated as to imagine that the destruction of machinery should better the situation of the persons employed in manufactures. These absurd ideas have been refuted over and over again, not only by writers on the subject, but by the Judges in their different circuits, that one might have expected none could be found ignorant enough to be influenced by them, and I should have hoped no man would have been as wicked as to instil such mischievous notions into the minds of these deluded men. The Legislature has heretofore provided penalties and serious penalties for the protection of this species of property; all that is required is that the law should be put in force, which can only be by vigilance and courage in detecting offenders. I only find one case in the Calendar which has any refer to this subject, and that person, most fortunately for himself, was by the prompt exertions of a Magistrate arrested, perhaps before he had completed the offence. He will probably be prosecuted under some of the provisions of what is called the Black Act, an Act passed to repress certain enormities in the reign of George I. committed by persons armed and disguised by blacking their faces, and as prosecutions under this act are extremely rare, I take the liberty of pointing out to you the words of the Act, 'If any person or persons being armed with swords, fire-arms, or other offensive weapons, and having his or their faces blacked, or being otherwise disguised, shall appear in any forest, park, &c. *or in any high road*, and shall be convicted thereof, they shall be adjudged guilty, of felony.'

"Two circumstances it will be observed are necessary to constitute this offence, that the person should be armed, and should be disguised by having his face blacked, and in the present instance perhaps it will appear, but of this you will judge when the case comes before you, that this person was discovered before the offence was completed, and that only one of these circumstances can be proved against him; he was evidently on the verge of committing a capital felony, from which he was, perhaps fortunately for himself, witheld by being taken into custody. You will therefore inquire not only as to his person being disguised, but as to the fact of his being armed with offensive weapons, as swords, fire-arms, or other weapons, calculated to injure or terrify his Majesty's subjects. I have presumed to make these observations because a case of this kind may not have come before you, and in a statute so extremely penal there ought to be satisfactory grounds for putting a person upon his trial before another Jury, who in such case will have ultimately to decide upon his guilt or innocence.

..."

The Bill against James Shaw, of Leeds, clothdresser, charging him with having disfigured his person by blacking his face, and with being unlawfully armed with offensive weapons, was thrown out, by the Grand Jury, on Wednesday; and he was, of course, discharged without being put upon his trial.



---

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002634/18120320/016/0005
London Chronicle - Friday 20 March 1812

Also in: https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002131/18120321/015/0004 Nottingham Journal - Saturday 21 March 1812

JAMES SHAW, the man apprehended at Leeds on the night of Wednesday the 15th of January with his face disfigured, was last week liberated from York Castle without trial, the Grand Jury having thrown out the bill. His offence did not come under the provisions of the black act; which requires not only that the face of the offender should be blacked, but that he should also be armed with "swords, fire-arms, or other offensive weapons." It must not be supposed, from this acquittal, that the laws are unequal to the punishment of those who assemble for the destruction of the property of their neighbours. This would be a dangerous supposition, and might lead to most fatal consequences. The laws are fully equal to the punishment of the guilty—but this particular statute did not apply to SHAW'S case; and in a country where law is not made to bend to expediency, a prisoner will always enjoy the advantage of any such variation,between the charge and the offence, as the humane discrimination of the Judge enabled him on the present occasion to point out.


---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000062/18120505/015/0003
Hull Packet - Tuesday 05 May 1812

A person of the name of Haigh was apprehended at Methley on Saturday se'nnight, on suspicion of having been concerned in the late attack upon Mr. Cartwright's mill. This man, who appears to have received a wound from a musket-ball in his shoulder without being able to give any satisfactory account of the cause of that wound, has undergone several examinations before Mr, Radcliffe, of Milnsbridge, and was on Thursday committed to York Castle. On Thursday he passed through Leeds, in a chaise and four, on his way to York, escorted by twelve dragoons. Two other wounded men `[elsewhere (e.g. Pilot (London) - Tuesday 05 May 1812 ) named as "Charles Cockroft and one Stocks"; Stock (sic) was liberated, but Cockroft remanded.]` have been in custody all the week on a similar charge, but we have not heard the result of their examination.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000239/18120512/002/0002
Manchester Mercury - Tuesday 12 May 1812

Committed la York Castle.— James Haigh, of Dalton, cloth-dresser, charged upon the oath of Joseph Ardron, and other persons, as strongly suspected of having been one of the persons who, on the night of the 11th of April, riotously assembled and attacked the mill of Mr. W. Cartwright, at Rawfolds. —This man was apprehended Methley, on Saturday week. It appears that since the attack above mentioned, he had been first at the house of a sister in-law, at Penistone, from whence he went to another sister at Methley. He was taken before Joseph Esq. of Milnsbridge, and after undergoing several examinations was fully committed on Thursday. He was conveyed to the Cattle in a chaise and four, escorted by a party of dragoons. —Two other men were apprehended as accomplices at Hill-House, near Huddersfield, on Monday evening, after several examinations, one of them named Stocks was liberated, but the other, Cockroft, was remanded.—On Monday night, it is strongly suspected, with a view to the rescue of the above men, the stable of Major Gordon, at Huddersfield, was set on fire, and nearly destroyed. The stratagem, however, failed; for instead of drawing away the guard which was placed over the prisoners, the officer, with great promptitude, doubled its force. Happily the fire did not communicate to any other building.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0002634/18130120/027/0005
London Chronicle - Wednesday 20 January 1813

January 10 , EXECUTION OF THE LUDDITES AT YORK.

Precisely at eleven o'clock, on Saturday, the following persons suffered the sentence of the law due to their crimes, viz.—John Hill, Joseph Crowther, Nathan Hoyle, Jonathan Dean, John Ogden, Thomas Brook, and John Walker. The above persons behaved in the most penitent and contrite manner we have ever witnessed, placed in the melancholy situation in which they were. During the time the Ordinary was performing the functions of his duty, the repeated and earnest prayers of the culprits might be heard at a considerable distance, supplicating the Divine Being to receive their souls into everlasting rest. Many of them, after the Clergyman had repeated "The Lord have mercy upon you," in a very audible voice articulated "I hope he will." Previous to the Drop being let down, a Hymn was given out very firmly by John Walker, to his fellow-culprits, all of whom heartily joined in singing the same. The behaviour of the whole was truly becoming their awful situation, each of them expressing their sincere repentance for the crimes they had committed, and placing their only hope of Salvation through the merits of the Redeemer.—John Hill addressed the populace nearly in the following terms:—"I hope, my good Christians, you will take warning by the punishment you will see this day inflicted upon me and my fellow companions. I lived for a number of years in the possession of vital religion, but unfortunately the fascinations of the world gained an ascendancy over my mind, and I fell away from God and the paths of rectitude about a half a year ago. I want you, who now hear me, against the commission of mine, or any other crimes, which may subject you to the ignominious death I am now going suffer."

Half past One o'Clock.—The following prisoners, viz. John Swallow, John Batley, Jos. Fisher, W. Hartley, Jas. Haigh, Jas. Hey, and Job Hay, were executed at the time specified above. The whole of them evinced a spirit of contrition which we have seldom witnessed upon a similar occasion. The concourse of spectators, as at the former occasion, was numerous. James Haigh spoke to Mr. Lancaster, a gentleman residing in the West Riding of this county, at some length; he regretted the situation in which he was placed, and earnestly exhorted his fellow-sufferers to make their peace with God. James Hey said but little; however, he evinced, by his conduct on the Drop, a sincere and ??feigned repentance for the crime the laws of his country had subjected him to. John Swallow afterwards spoke to the populace in nearly the following terms:—"Ladies and Gentlemen, the situation in which I am now placed demands your serious consideration; being led astray by wicked and unprincipled characters, I was seduced from the paths of virtue, and fell into that dreadful time for which I am now going to suffer. I beg you to take warning by my fate, and I hope that God will grant you grace to live a life of sobriety and uprightness, in order to prevent your being brought to that situation in which I am now placed." The conduct of the prisoners was truly becoming their awful situation. The bodies were let down at half past two o'clock, and delivered to respective relations.
