# The Nottinghamshire Outbreaks Continue

In the first quarter of 1812, frame breaking was to continue in Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire, and were increasingly reported by Edward Baines in the Leeds Mercury. It would be these reports that perhaps provided an inspiration to the Yorkshire Luddites, albeit with different motivation.


```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18120201/018/0004
Leeds Mercury - Saturday 01 February 1812

RIOTS IN NOTTINGHAMSHIRE AND DERBYSHIRE. *(From the Review of Friday last.)* In recording the depredations of the frame-breakers, we have been led to hope each succeeding week would terminate these ever to be lamented transactions. In this, however, we have been mistaken; for each succeeding week has hitherto been accompanied by succeeding crimes, and our present records present a scene not less lamentable than the one given in our last; and prove that neither the vigilance of police officers, the terror of the military, nor even the impending penalties of the law, are sufficient to suppress this spirit of revolt. It is with pleasure we state that one reputable house in this town (Wm. Nunn and Co.) have publicly announced that they have taken off all the frame rent, and are giving the full prices. This conduct, if followed by other manufacturers, will, we trust, soon restore peace and harmony in the town and neighbourhood.

On Saturday night one frame was broken in this town; and the following evening four were destroyed at New Radford, one of which was supposed to be the completest silk frame in existence; and, we understand, was then employed in making an order of stockings for the Prince Regent. On this case we are desired by the holder of these frames to state that he had worked in the finest of these frames for twenty years; during which time he has continued to receive the same price, and marked the stockings with the proper marks. On the same night two or three frames were broken at Ruddington, nine of the warp lace kind at Limby, all of great value, and all employed in making the two-course-hole net. At the last mentioned place the people had an expectation that a visit would be paid them, and a number had agreed to watch for the approach of their nocturnal visitors, which they did till midnight, at which time, imagining all the danger was over, they dispersed, and went to their respective homes. This was no sooner done, than the framebreakers made their appearance: fourteen of them entered the house of Mr. Shipley, and in ten minutes completed their work. The damage is estimated at 200l. and upwards. On the same night, seven plain cotton frames at Cotmanhay, in the parish of Ilkiston; and, if our information be correct, eleven of the latter description were destroyed at Swanwick: the two latter towns are in Derbyshire.

At ten o'clock this morning we received the disagreeable intelligence, that 22 frames were last night broken at Lenton. About 50 men entered the village, armed in various ways; and while the mischief was going on, every pass in the village was guarded. One man, who was passing with a loaf of bread, was stopped by them, and compelled to stand sentry himself, with a bar of iron in his hand, with an order to give the alarm if any one approached, or otherwise to have his brains blown out. The man who ran to Nottingham to inform the soldiers, had a narrow escape; one of the frame-breakers running after him, vociferating the most horrid vengeance if he caught him. The man escaped, and so did the depredators. The names of the persons at whose houses the frames are broken, with the number at each house, are as follows :-Five at G. Ball's, four of which, he has informed us, were his own property, and were working at full price; eight at Thos. Selby's; one at Wm. Selby's, and pulled the jack-wires out of another two at Jos Shepherd's; one at ——— Taylor's; one at John Barnes's; one at Ann Taylor's; and two at Wm. Burton's. After they had done, they fired three pistols. What adds to the audacity of this affair is, that Lenton, is only about a quarter of a mile from the barracks, and one from Nottingham.
```

In prosecuting the men charged with frame-breaking, the maximum sentence that could be applied for *frame-breaking*, a simople felony, was transportation; but if it could be proven that they had entered with an intention of burglaty, then the penalty was a capital one.

---

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002131/18120222/008/0002
Nottingham Journal - Saturday 22 February 1812

HOUSE OF COMMONS.

MONDAY, Feb. 17.—The House went into a Committee of Supply, and a Resolution for granting £100,000, for the service of the Local Militia, was agreed to, and the Report ordered to be received to-morrow.

FRAME-BREAKERS' BILL.

On the Order of the Day for the second reading of the Nottingham Frame-Breakers' Bill being read,

*Mr. Abercromby* highly reprobated the conduct of the persons whose crimes had caused the Bill to be brought into the House; at the same time he was sorry to say it was impossible for him to concur in this Bill, which he considered would be wholly ineffectual, and therefore injurious. It was a measure of the greatest importance, and ought to be treated with the greatest caution; consequently, he hoped the Right Hon. Gentleman would not press the second reading immediately.

*Mr. Hall* thought the situation of the county of Nottingham was such as called for the immediate passing of the Bill; he should, therefore, support the second reading of the Bill.

*Capt. Herbert* could not give his support to the present Bill, which went to increase the number of capital punishments, till he was convinced the law, as it at present stood, was not sufficient for the punishment of the rioters, if once they were apprehended.

*Mr. J. Smith* thought it necessary something should immediately be done, or the evil might become much more serious than it now is. He supported the present measure, because no better was proposed. He should be most anxious, when the proper time arrived, to have an enquiry instituted into the *causes* of the disturbed state of the counties of Nottingham Leicester, and Derby. He believed it was the decay of trade which had caused them; but let the cause be what it would, he thought the first object should be to put the rioters down. He thought the present measure would have that effect; of course, he should give it his support.

*Mr. Lockhart* thought the terror of such a punishment hanging over their head, as that proposed by the Bill, would have the effect of deterring the rioters in future. This crime, of which the rioters had been guilty, amounted nearly to High Treason; and when the Bill went into a Committee, he should propose that persons tried under it should have the same indulgence that persons charged with High Treason had, namely, having at least one Counsel allowed them.

*Mr. Herbert* supported the Bill. This was not to be a permanent law: it was intended as a mere temporary measure. If our laws were like those of the Medes and Persians, unalterable, he should then, indeed, hesitate before he agreed to an increase of our capital punishments.

*Mr. Wrottesley* opposed the Bill. He was of opinion it would have a contrary effect to that contemplated by the Right Hon. Gentleman who brought it in.

*Sir S. Romilly* agreed that this was an evil to which an immediate remedy should be applied. The question was, would this Bill prove a remedy? He was of opinion it would not; and that the evil would exist as much after passing this Bill as it did at present; if these disturbances arose out of a combination amongst the journeymen, there was a law in existence already, which inflicted a punishment of transportation for 14 years for this offence, but no one had yet been convicted under it. He could see no greater probability of their being punished under the proposed Bill, since, either the rioters had obtained such influence as enabled them to suppress, by terror, all evidence, or those who should carry the law into effect, felt no wish so to do: and if either of these causes were the reason of the rioters escaping, could passing the present Bill, increasing the severity of punishment, operate to remove the difficulty of conviction?—He thought this was a case which demanded the most mature consideration; and that the Bill should not have been moved for and brought in on the same day. Who was there present that knew what was the *origin* of these disturbances? Was it a dislike to the masters, or was it a persuasion that these frames reduced the call for human labour? No Gentleman could answer him; and was it not then necessary that, previous to legislating on the lives of their fellow-subjects, the House should be put in possession of further information?

*Mr. Bathurst* said, the question was not whether there would be a greater number of punishments under the new law than there had been under the old law, but whether the proposed measure would not have the effect of preventing the commission of the crime altogether, by the severity of the punishment it proposed to inflict on offenders.

*Mr. C. Wynne* thought the present Bill would prove wholly ineffectual, and therefore he should oppose it.

*Sir A. Pigot* differed in opinion with those Gentlemen who supported the present Bill. There was already a law of no little severity existing for the punishment of this offence, namely, transportation; and before the Legislature was called on to make a law more penal, it ought to be shewn that persons had been prosecuted under the existing law, and that that law had been found ineffectual. He denied that the proposed Bill would forward the discovery of offenders, or induce persons to come forward more readily and give evidence; he was also convinced, that, as a system of terror, it would fail as a mode of preventing the commission of offences in future. In his opinion, the law, as it at present stood, if properly enforced, would be found fully sufficient for its purpose, and that the proposed Bill would prove ineffectual, and, therefore, he should oppose it.

*Mr. Ryder* said, he did not intend that this should be a permanent measure, but one arising out of the necessity of the moment; and, when in the Committee, it would be proper to fix the period of its duration. He felt much gratified at the testimony borne by Gentlemen on the other side of the House to the exertions of Government in quelling the riots. This mischief was of such a nature, that there was no security against the repetition of it; it must be put down. He did not mean to say, that this Bill would facilitate detection; but when once it was known in the country that Parliament had looked at those offences in the way they ought to be looked at, he was sure there would be the greatest chance of the mischief ceasing.

*Mr. Whitbread* opposed the Bill.

*Mr. Frankland* said, if ever there was an occasion for expressing indignation on the part of the Legislature, it was when the paternal authority of the State was set at defiance, by men who, indifferent to the welfare of their fellow-creatures, were sporting with the lives of multitudes. The present was such an occasion. It was false to say there were more capital punishments enacted by law in this country than in others. It was not a single act of disobedience, but it was an avowed system of defiance to law, that made it necessary to inflict the severest punishment; and this Bill was indispensably necessary for such purpose.

The House then divided:—For the second reading, 84; against it, 17.—On the question, whether the Bill be committed to-morrow or Wednesday,

*Sir S. Romilly* repeated his former objections; and expressed surprise that the Secretary of State did not give a longer notice to the House before he brought in the Bill. This was no remedy for the magnitude of the evil: it would produce no effect, until some act, coming merely within the letter of the statute, was committed, and then it would be in the lenity of the prosecutors, whether it should be inflicted. It was in this conviction that he opposed the Bill.

*Mr. Bathurst* was confident that this law would produce its effect.

*Mr. Frankland* said, this Act was founded on other Acts passed against similar offences.

*Colonel Eyre* spoke a few words in favour of the Bill.

The House again divided:—For committing the Bill to-morrow, 80; against it, 15.

TUESDAY, Feb. 18.—On the motion of Sir Samuel Romilly, the Committee on Parish Apprentices, moved by Mr. W. Bootle last Session, was re-appointed.

Mr. Secretary Ryder moved the Order of the Day, for the House resolving itself into a Committee on the Bill for more exemplary punishing Frame-breaking.

On the question that the Speaker do leave the Chair,

*Mr. Lambe* rose, and said he thought it in general dangerous for Government to interfere in matters of trade, and to hold up to manufacturers hopes of amelioration which probably, in the present circumstances, could not be realized. He considered, however, the premeditated attack on property, which the Bill was intended to prevent, so pregnant with ruin, and so portentous in its consequences, that he deemed some additional remedy absolutely necessary to check the progress of the evil. Detection, he argued, was not rendered difficult by the severity of the punishment already awarded by the law; but a system of terror, which pervaded the whole of the disturbed districts, prevented evidence from coming forward; and this was an argument of the offence itself. He was confident that additional punishment was necessary to deter people engaged in these illegal combinations, and would therefore vote in support of the Bill.

*Mr. Thompson Turner* wanted to be assured that all the means afforded by the law as it stood had been employed to quell these disturbances, before he could give his vote for capital punishment.

*General Tarleton* wished for an inquiry into the causes of the disturbances.

*Mr. Elliston* thought the evil in a great measure originated in the pressure occasioned by the war, which no administration could completely remove; but instead of insulting the lower orders with fallacious hopes, he thought it more prudent and more patriotic, to come, as much as possible, to their assistance, and to teach them to bear with patience those evils which could not be prevented. The dread of capital punishment could never be meant to facilitate detection, not to deter from the offence, and as such was evidently the intention of the House, the Bill should have his support.

*Mr. Courteney* was for the Committee, as was *Mr. Lushington*.

M*r. Wynne* objected to the penalty of death being inflicted by the Bill, on men destroying manufacturing utensils, perhaps of small value, unless it was done by a combination of armed men. An apprentice or a journeyman might be liable to suffer death, under that Bill, for an act of sudden passion against his employer.

*The Attorney General* could not foresee that either Judge or Jury could ever put such a construction on the Bill; and it was to be considered, besides, that one of the principal features of the disturbances was, that the people at whose houses these frames and utensils were deposited, were strongly suspected of being in combination with the rioters.

*Sir S. Romilly* would not trust the life of a subject to any construction of a Bill by either Judge or Jury. If a clause was introduced, enacting pain of death only when more than one person was concerned in the offence, it would remove, in a great measure, his objections to the Bill.

*Mr. Perceval* was of opionion that such a clause would go to defeat the whole purpose of the Bill. It was insurrection in disguise, and when it was considered that many of the holders of those frames were suspected of being parties to the combination, a single man entering a dwelling-house to effect the purpose, while his accomplices stood at the door, would be above the reach of the law. He thought the construction of the Bill might safely be left to the Judges and Jury.

*Mr. Smith* wished the word *damage* to be left out, as conveying too indefiniteand extensive a meaning.

A long desultory conversation took place on this amendement. The Bill afterwards passed the Committee with some verbal amendments; and the Report was ordered to be taken into consideration tomorrow.

The Nottingham Watch and Ward Bill afterwards went into a Committee, when several new clauses were introduced, one of which went to extend the provisions of the measures to other counties. The Report was brought up, and ordered for further consideration.

---

In the House of Lords, discussion of the Nottingham Frame-Breaking Prevention Bill ended with an amendment was called for that would keep frame-breaking a felony not attracting of a death sentence.

```{admonition} Nottingham Frame Breaking Prevention Bill, March 1812
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18120307/003/0002
Leeds Mercury - Saturday 07 March 1812

Monday, February `sic` 2. NOTTINGHAM FRAME BREAKING PREVENTION BILL.

The Order for their Lordships going into a Committee on this Bill, being read,

The Earl of *Harrowby* argued ably and at some length in support of the Bill. He pressed to the consideration of their Lordships, that the dangerous and destructive practises which the Bill was meant to suppress, were now extending rapidly to other parts of the country, and that a speedy and vigorous remedy had become absolutely necessary. The exertions of the police and the existing laws were found insufficient. The measure was, however, consonant to that which had been the course and conduct of the Legislature on former occasions nearly similar, in that of the Woollen Manufactures for instance, when, in the 14th of George the First, the punishment of death was provided for that which previously was only visited with a slight punishment. Noble Lords opposite were pleased to characterize the measure in very harsh language, and to call its authors sanguinary and bloody minded; but they were such bloody-minded men as the Earl of Hardwicke, and afterwards Lord Talbot, both which great and good men approved of the measures to which he alluded. When the middle system was inefficient, it was justifiable, it was necessary to recur to measures of severity when called for by circumstances; and to leave the practical application of that severer system, as particular cases and circumstances may call for it. Upon these grounds and principles, the measure proceeded, principles which more than once, on former occasions, governed the determinations of the British Legislature.

*Lord Grenville* thought the evil of a deeper nature than the Noble Lords were inclined to admit. The great cause was the bad policy which had plunged our Manufacturers into distress. The distress and the cause were spreading together. It was now that the effect of the paper issue was making itself felt thro' the community; and it was impossible in any case to conceive, why the same evils which had extended on an excessive issue of paper, should not be attended with the same evils here as in all other countries.— This was a more prominent cause than even the Orders in Council. His Noble Friend (Lord Lauderdale,) had imputed the distress to the sudden rise and fall of wages by the sudden demands for manufactures; but even where the wages did not fall, the excessive issue of paper lowered their real value. The same money could not purchase the same quantity of provisions; and unless there was a *maximum* on the price of the necessaries of life, the working people must be more and more impoverished, even in the nominal receipt of undiminished wages. The great Manufacturers worked for foreign markets; the rise of the price abroad did not keep pace with the rise of the nominal value of the currency at home; and in consequence, they were obliged to tell their workmen that they could not make the prime cost on their materials. The workmen said, and with not less truth, that they could not live by their work; and thus distress came rapidly among the most useful and industrious class of the community. The present system had the direct tendency of exhausting the resources of the industrious part of the public; this was no new thing to their Lordships; it had been pointed out from the beginning; every step of its progress had been regularly detailed, and it was now making its way with accelerated evil. Was this a thing within penal laws to correct? Were men to be cured of this by the gibbet and the gallows? The Bill might irritate and punish, and inflict miseries dreadful to feeling and humanity; but it would not stop an evil which resulted from the wretchedness into which a dangerous and headlong system had driven the working people. His Noble Friend (Lord Harrowby,) in quoting a passage from Judge Blackstone, seemed to doubt whether that great Judge looked on the punishment of death a means of prevention, or as the penalty for enormous crime. But putting the first point out of question, was the guilt of this crime of that enormous nature which required death? The Noble Lord (Harrowby) obviously combined the individual act with the crime of conspiracy; but the Bill omitted all the intention of conspiracy, and alluded only to the act of the individual. It would be answered, that the intention of the Bill was chiefly against the conspiracy; but where was the object of a Bill to be found but in its leading clauses, or preamble? He was sorry to hear an attempt to justify the introduction of penal statutes by great names. If there was any case in which we should not look to precedents, or give up any thing to great names, it was a case like the present. To justify the infliction of death, there must be no authority but strong necessity. The Statute Book was stained with sanguinary laws; it was a stigma on the character of the country; foreigners looked upon it as such, and appealed to its existence as the standard of our national character. A Noble Lord (Harrowby) spoke of the mildness with which these laws were administered. A Philosopher once said, that among the Athenians, to praise the Athenians was extremely easy; but where were we to find the great evidence of a mild and legislative spirit—the prevention? Punishment was the object of our laws. If the question was of the purity of the administration of justice, he must agree that here we were unrivalled—that there is no country in the world—that there never was a country, where the innocent man was so nearly secure of acquittal as here. But as to punishment, he knew of no country in Europe—perhaps he ought to speak of it as before the late dreadful revolution—where so many suffered by sanguinary punishments. It was impossible to conceive any justification for the spirit, except in the confusion and blending of all principles, or the adoption of that horrible principle of making every offence against the law punishable by death. Were we about to write in blood the new code for the new situation in which we were gradually advancing? In this instance we could not punish without frequently committing the most shocking offences against humanity. Crimes of the most different nature were mingled under one punishment; and death was to be equally inflicted for conspiracy and for acts which a school-boy's whipping would be too severe. Men were to to be hanged for *damaging* frames. What a word! and how capable of perversion. What was *damaging* a frame? The slightest injury to the slightest part of a complicated machinery was to bring a man in peril of his life. This was enough to throw the body of the manufacturing people into despair. Tell them, that if from folly or malice a man break any part of a machine, he forfeits his life, as much as if he had conspired to destroy the whole machinery of the establishment,—as much as if he had murdered the man at the machine; and the consequence must be horrid. The wisdom of Legislators was employed in pointing out the gradations of crime, and making the return always more easy than the progress; but here,

"Returning was as tedious as go o'er,"

and the moment the workman had touched upon his crime, he had incurred the punishment of its consummation.

Lord *Rosslyn*, in a short speech, disapproved of the Bill.

The question was put, on discharging the order for going into the Committee, and carried in the negative.

In the Committee Lord *Liverpool* proposed the omission of the word "damage," and the introduction of others in different parts of the Bill, more accurately pointing out the malicious intention and serious injury.

Lord *Grenville* proposed the omission of the words "person or," which attached the punishment to the individual act, and wished to substitute others, applying it solely to the act resulting from conspiracy. A conversation ensued, in which The Lord Chancellor expressed himself decidedly against the general application, under the impression that unless the individual act was punished as such, the law would be entirely evaded in practice.

Lord *Grenville* declared, in explanation, that he had too much respect for their Lordships' House, to impute personal motives of cruelty to any of its Members. But he would pronounce the Bill now before them most sanguinary in its enactments, and increasing the disgrace which resulted from the already too great severity of our penal code.

After a few words from Lord *Holland*, the amendment was put and negatived.

Lord *Grenville* then proposed a similar amendment in the next clause. The object of the amendment was to exempt from the punishment of death, acts of destruction committed by individuals from private pique or malice, and to include only the cases of those who tumultuously assembled, and unlawfully combined, for the destruction of frame works. It was evident, his Lordship observed, that there was here a very great difference of guilt and danger, and that there ought to be a corresponding difference in punishment.

This amendment was negatived.

Lord *Grosvenor* proposed an amendment, the object of which, we understood to be, that the attempt to destroy should not be declared felony, but a misdemeanor.—Agreed to.

The clause requiring the occupier of any frame which might be destroyed, to give information to the nearest Magistrate within 24 hours, under penalty of fine and imprisonment, was objected by Lord Grenville, on the grounds of excessive hardship of compelling individuals to leave their homes and families under whatever circumstances, for the purpose of giving the information required. His Lordship therefore moved the insertion of the qualifying words,— "unless such individual shall assign reasonable cause for not having given the information required." Acceded to.

The House then resumed, and the Report was ordered to be brought up to-morrow.— Adjourned.
```

It seems, however, that the Lords did not insist on the adoption of that amendement by the House of Commons.

```{admonition} A message was received from the Lords, March 1812
:class: dropdown
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000237/18120313/001/0002
Stamford Mercury - Friday 13 March 1812

PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS.— ... In the House of Commons, a message was received from the Lords, informing the House that the Peers did not insist upon their amendment in the Frame-breaking Prevention Bill.
```

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000311/18120305/011/0004
Cheltenham Chronicle - Thursday 05 March 1812

HOUSE OF LORDS

Thursday.—Several Bills of private nature were read a first time, as was the Exchequer Bills Landing Bill second time. the motion for site reading of the Nottingham Frame-breaking Prevention Bill, Lord Byron, in a maiden speech, stated his conviction that the rioters were driven to the commission such offences by absolute want, and that had a proper investigation been instituted in the earlier stages of the disturbances, the present measure would have been unnecessary. He concluded by recommending that their wants should be inquired into and relieved.

Lords Holland, Grenville, Lauderdale, and Grosvenor, spoke against it; and Lords Liverpool & Eldon in support of it—after which Lord Lauderdale's amendment for adjourning the debate till Monday, being negatived by 32 to 17, the Biii was read a second time.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0002644/18120301/009/0003?browse=true
National Register (London) - Sunday 01 March 1812

HOUSE OF LORDS.

Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, no business of public importance occurred at this House.

THURSDAY, FEB. 27.
NOTTINGHAM RIOTS.

The Order of the Day for entering on the second reading of the Nottingham Frame-breaking Prevention Bill being read—

The Earl of LIVERPOOL rose and observed, that the object of the Bill before the House, and the unhappy cause of it were well known. They had originated in a long continued and systematic plan of riot and disorder. No exertions on the part of Government had been omitted to ascertain the causes and prevent the effect of such disorders. Persons had been sent to Nottingham to examine into them upon the spot.—The Bill divided itself into two parts. The second, but most prominent part, went to compel the persons, in whose houses frames and other manufacturing machines were destroyed, to be responsible for the damage and the outrage. The former part was merely conformable to other Acts of Parliament, previously framed with a view to similar offences. The root of the evil appeared to be in the difficulty of detection, and that difficulty rested on the mildness of the law as it at present stood, and which evidently called for that sort of rigour which had often been effectual, by striking terror into the minds of the guilty and the mischievous; but such rigour was only intended to have a temporary operation. It was obvious to review and reconsideration, and by no means meant to add permanency to the severity of the penal code. His Lordship concluded with moving, that the Bill be read a second time.

Lord BIRON observed, that in offering his sentiments on the subject before the House, he should speak from a personal knowledge of a good deal of what related to it. Great disorders had undoubtedly existed, and he had known of 40 frames being broken and destroyed by the active perseverance of a body of men, habitually, till that occasion, industrious and honest. Large detachments of the military had been sent down, and Officers of police had been sent down, and authorised to take up many persons; but these were measures which would much better have been superseded by others of grave, wise, and rational inquiry into the true cause and origin of the disorders. That would be found in the misery attendant on the decay of trade and manufactures, in the policy which had, unhappily for the country, been too long pursued by his Majesty's Ministers, whose proceedings were marked throughout by weakness, rashness, and inconsistency; by marches and countermarches, terminating only in miscarriage, ushered forth with all the pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war. The harsh and cruel measure proposed in the Bill he could by no means approve of, and thought that even a mob might be better reclaimed by conciliation and mildness than by rigour; and when he recollected the benevolent exertions which in this country had taken place in behalf of the suffering and distressed Portuguese, he could not help contrasting that benevolence with the harshness set forth in the present Bill. But the evils to the correction of which their Lordships ought to look, were not confined to Nottingham; at Bristol and its neighbourhood he had lately witnessed misery not less striking and deplorable. To obviate such distresses rigour was not the hopeful means; Martial Law and decimation, were not to be applied to a whole country—in short, convinced as he was, that to pass the Bill without inquiry might produce the worst consequences, he should oppose the second reading.

Lord HOLLAND conceiving that he stood in a peculiar situation respecting the Bill under consideration, could not suffer it to proceed without some observation. He had been the first in that House to call the attention of their Lordships to the disorders at Nottingham, but he deprecated being supposed for a moment to have been consenting to any thing so monstrous as the Bill in question; and howsoever he might deplore the evils felt and complained of, he should prefer the rejection to the adoption of the Bill.

The LORD CHANCELLOR should not detain the House long. If the Bill was such as it had been described, unwise, improvident, and foolish, it would well become their Lordships to reject it, but till that was made out he must support the Bill. The disorders in Nottingham were of a different description from those for which the statute of the 28th of his Majesty was provided. They betrayed a systematic defiance of all law. The object of the Bill was to facilitate the means of a detection. For that purpose, both parts of the Bill should be taken in a combined view. The suggestion of the Noble Baron (Lord Holland), respecting the rendering responsible the persons in whose houses frames might be broke, was not practicable, for they were generally persons without property.

Lord GRENVILLE could not suffer the Bill to be read a second time without expressing his indignation at the principle of it. He did expect from the Noble Lords opposite some show or semblance of argument, in support of a measure that was to add another Act to the black and horrible catalogue which marks and stigmatizes our Statute Book. But while he lived in a country professing to be governed by laws, he never would consent to leave the lives of his fellow citizens dependent on the discretion of a Minister, or the mercy of a Judge.

The question was then put, when there appeared for the second reading, 38; against it, 17. The Bill was then ordered to be committed on Monday.—Adjourned.

---
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002194/18120321/008/0003
Sun (London) - Saturday 21 March 1812

THE ROYAL ASSENT

Was given by Commission to the Lottery Amendment Bill, the Two Mutiny Bills, Men be.s' Indemnity Bill, Oak Bark and Tobacco Imp° - tation Bills, Frame-Breaking Prevention Bill, Nottingham Watch and Ward Bill, and to several Private Bills.


https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2012/03/7th-march-1812-derbyshire-luddites.html






```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002131/18120314/009/0003
Nottingham Journal - Saturday 14 March 1812
We understand, that not withstanding the pending severities of the law upon the frame-breakers, ten frames were broken and totally demolished, at Pentrich, on Saturday night last; and on Tuesday night last, the iron work of one narrow stocking frame was stolen and completely carried off from a house, situated on the Parson's Flat, at Basford, near this town.

```

Nottingham Assizes in March 1812, seven Luddites were sentenced to transportation for life; two others were acquitted.
https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2012/03/23rd-march-1812-luddites-are-charged.html ??




```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000317/18120328/006/0003

Northampton Mercury - Saturday 28 March 1812

ASSIZE INTELLIGENCE.

At Derby Assizes which commenced on Thursday last, before Mr. Justice Bayley, the following prisoners took their trials; Perceval Cook, and James Tomlinson alias Pruz, for burglariously breaking into, and robbing the dwelling-house of Mr. Samuel Hunt, of Ockbrook mill, and also for a burglary committed at the dwelling-house of Mr. John Brentnall, of Locko Grange, were capitally convicted, and are left for execution. John England, convicted of being an accessary before the fact in the burglary at Locko Grange, and an accessary after the fact in the burglary at Ockbrook mill; and John Thompson, for burglariously entering into, and robbing the dwelling-house of Mr. T. Theobald, at Wilstrop, were each capitally convicted, and received sentence of death, but were afterwards reprieved. (Thomas Draper, an accomplice in the burglaries at Ockbrook mill and Locko Grange, was admitted evidence for the Crown.)

At Nottingham assizes, William Carnel, aged 22, and Joseph Maples, aged 16, for entering by force into the dwelling-house and shop of John Braithwaite, at Basford, on the 3d of January last, and therein breaking and destroying seven stocking frames, after a patient hearing, were found guilty. The Judge explained the law of the case, which applied equally to the cases of all the other prisoners, namely, that should the Jury be of opinion that the prisoners entered the house with violence for the purpose of frame-breaking only, the crime amounted to simple felony; but if they were of opinion they had entered the premises with other designs, and that they had done other damage, then the offence was capital. The Jury brought in a verdict, finding the prisoners guilty of frame-breaking, and they were both sentenced to 14 years' transportation.—Two other prisoners, viz. Benjamin Hancock, aged 21, and Joseph Peck, aged 17, for riot and frame-breaking, at Sutton-in-Ashfield, received a similar sentence. Gervas Marshall, aged 17, George Poley, aged 16, and George Green (the latter a prisoner on bail), for frame-breaking, at Sutton aforesaid, were sentenced to seven years' transportation each.—George Hinchliffe, for horse stealing, and William Wells, alias Black Tom (a notorious character,) for highway robbery, were found guilty, and received sentence of death; but the Judge was pleased to reprieve them before he left the town.

```

https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2012/03/30th-march-1812-seven-nottinghamshire.html

Derby Mercuty 9th April - transportation of Carnell, Poley et al



```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18120321/012/0003
Leeds Mercury - Saturday 21 March 1812

NOTTINGHAM ASSIZES.

The Commission of Assize was opened in the Shire and Town Halls on Friday the 13th instant, when Mr. JUSTICE BAILEY addressed the Grand Jury to the following effect:—

His Lordship began by complimenting the Magistracy and character of the town, on the smallness of the calendar, except two cases respecting frame-breaking, and one, connected in some degree with that crime, which was for writing a threatening letter. On the two former cases, his Lordship observed, that if the house, specified in the Calendar, had been entered with violence, for the purpose of frame breaking only, *and no other damage had been done*, the crime amounted to simple felony; but if other damage had been done, then the offence was capital. On the subject of the threatening letter, his Lordship observed, that if the evidence were perfectly clear to their view of the question, they then would find a bill; if not, he hoped they would not find against the prisoner; as cases of this sort should not be brought before a Petty Jury, except on the clearest evidence. At the same time he most strenuously enjoined the Gentlemen of the Jury, equally to lay aside all prejudice against the prisoner, and all fear, from whatever quarter, for having done their duty.

Tuesday, March 17.

The Court was crowded to excess, by persons of all ranks, anxious to hear the trials of the prisoners confined on suspicion of Frame-breaking. Serjeant Vaughan and Mr. Reader, retained, in the first instance, as Counsel for the prisoners, had received an order from the Treasury to act as Counsel against them, and this order they obeyed.

*William Carnel*, aged 22, and *Joseph Maples*, aged 16, both of Basford, were placed at the Bar, and pleaded not guilty. After an opening speech from Mr. Clarke,

Elizabeth Braithwaite, the first witness called, stated, that in Jan. last, she resided at Old Basford; that her husband, John Braithwaite was a stocking-maker, and at the time stated in the indictment, he kept seven plain cotton frames, which were occupied by five apprentices, one journeyman, of the name of Towlson, and himself. She further stated, that on the 3d of January, about ten minutes before eight in the evening, a person knocked at the door, and asked for Towlson; that the door was bolted; and, before she could open it, it was forced, and a man entered, whom she saw have hold of the outer handle of the door, he fell over a chair, and believes it was Carnel, mentioned in the indictment; that he walked into the shop with a hammer over his arm, and broke the end of a slur-bar; that eleven more entered after him; that the first man who entered stood as guard to the rest; and that one man whom she knew, and who used a hammer, is not yet taken. Here the witness was desired to look round the Court, and point the prisoner, Carnel, out. She turned round very attentively several times, and declared she could not see him, and that if he was there, he must have held down his head—thought his imprisonment would alter his appearance; but not so much as to prevent her from owning him, except he was disguised, *for she had known him from a child*. She was then ordered to mount the table in the centre of the Court, to try if by that means she could identify him—she did so, and after twice pacing it round, she pointed out a man who was mixed among the spectators, whose features she thought was like Carnel. She was then desired to look at one of the Sheriff's officers, who stood near to Carnel, and give her opinion, *if that was the man*. On fixing her eyes closely upon that quarter, she pointed out the man; and said, "that is Carnel." She was then asked whether she knew any other person near him, when she pointed to another in the prisoner's box, and said, "that is Maples." On being asked why she knew Carnel to be one of the men who had violated the premises of her husband, she said, that when the scuffle was going on in the shop, she called out for her husband to be brought out, and that Carnel (after having given her husband a nudge over the shoulder with a hammer, in consequence of which he had been lame ever since,) complied with her request; and that in the bustle the mask was pulled off his face, which she immediately recognized, though his cheeks and nose were blacked, and his upper-lip red. She knew Carnel by his voice, but dared not call him by his name; but that it was him, she had no doubt. Maples clapt a pistol to her breast, with this exclamation, "Dam you for a bitch, I will shoot you if you don't hold your noise;" she seized the pistol, turned the muzzle towards his throat, and drew the trigger, and had it gone off it must have shot him; but believed it was not charged, because it struck fire without going off. While this was going on she heard some one call out, "My lads, work on!" which order she thought, was obeyed, as, she said, the hammers went like those in a smith's shop. When the seven frames were broken, she stated that seven men went through the shop windows, and five out at the house door; among the latter of whom was Maples, who she saw charging a pistol after he went out; she had no other way of identifying his person than those above described. She stated the mischief to be done in 20 or 22 minutes, which makes the ending of the time 12 minutes after eight; and that Carnel returned in 20 minutes after on pretence of looking at the ruins; and said, if *Ned* had not done his work well, he was come to complete it; when she said, You rogue, are you come again? you are not the man you was some time ago; to which he replied, I have not been here before,—you have, said she, for I know you right well! She then said, that his head was wet, as if he had been washing himself; that black streaks were visible from his ears to his chin; and that she said, you have been to the upper pump to wash you, and you are not now disguised.

Nothing material came out on the cross-examination, except that witness had told a Mrs. Jackson, that one Wotton had first entered the house; but this she had done, as she said, to "gorge" Mrs Jackson, who was "pumping" her to tell tales.

The evidence of John Braithwaite, the next witness, was in substance the same as his wife's, except that he did not profess to know anything of Maples' person.

The prisoners were charged with burglary, for entering a dwelling-house, as the Judge said, after the light of heaven had ceased to enable one man to distinguish the features of another; and stealing thereout two files, one rasp, two pair of pliers, and a hand-vice, as well as for feloniously breaking the stocking-frames. But here Serjeant Rough put it as a question to the Judge, whether, to constitute a theft, the *intention* of thieving was not necessary to be proved? To this the Judge assented; and it was his opinion that the frame-breakers had no other object in view *than that of breaking frames*, he wished the Jury to divest their minds of that part of the charge which related to stealing the articles named above; in particular as nothing of the kind had been found upon the premises or persons of the prisoners.

John Griffin and ———— Burrows, two constables, deposed that they seized and searched Maples, on the 4th of January, and found upon his person a pistol and some flints, which were produced in Court. Mrs. Braithwaite, however, believed that the pistol then produced was not the one she had seen in the possession of Maples; and he said his father had lent it to him to shoot sparrows with some months ago, who had found it in a particular place in the parish of Wollaton, which he described.

The evidence on the part of the Crown being closed, the prisoners were called upon for their defence, when Carnel declared that Mrs. Braithwaite had made a different statement before the Magistrates at the time of his commitment to what she had done then, respecting his treatment of her husband at the time the frames were broken: and on her re-examination, she admitted that instead of Carnel "nudging" her husband with a hammer, he had, she believed, been the means of saving his life. The Judge noted this circumstance, and said it would stand in Carnel's favor another day, providing he was then found guilty.

An *alibi* was positively sworn to both, on behalf of Maples and Carnel. Three witnesses deposed, that the former was in their presence, white-washing a house from 7 o'clock, on the evening mentioned in the indictment, till past 12 o'clock; and that he had never been off the premises. And four witnesses traced the time Carnel had been in their presence from half past 6, to a quarter before nine on the same night.

Here, with the exception of what related to character, which was much to the credit of both the prisoners, the whole of the evidence closed; and the learned Judge in delivering his charge to the Jury, stated, that notwithstanding the time had been apparently so connectively accounted for on the part of the prisoners, during the space in which the frames were stated to have been broken, yet it was very possible, for these persons to have been deceived in the time to the extent of 15 or 20 minutes, and especially in the case of Carnel, because they had measured the time rather by the occurrences of the evening, than by the accurate movements of a time-piece; and this rendered it very possible for them to have been at the scene of action.

After a patient hearing of six hours, the Jury returned a verdict of *Not Guilty* for Maples, and *Guilty of Frame-breaking* against Carnel; when his Lordship desired them to re-consider their verdict, and pointed out to them the impropriety of disuniting the burglarious entry into the house from the act of simple felony, occasioned by breaking the frames. All the alteration however, which the Jury chose to make, was that of uniting Maples with Carnel, and finding them both *Guilty of Frame-breaking only*, thus doing away the capital part of the charge.—The verdict being recorded, his Lordship addressed the prisoners in a most solemn and impressive manner. He deeply lamented, that two young men, whose character, till then, had stood unimpeached, should have so far forgotten their duty to themselves and the laws of their country, as to let their misguided zeal, and the evil counsels of others older and possessing more corrupt hearts than themselves, ever have led them into so perilous a situation; a situation which would have been far more perilous, if the burglarious part of the charge had been found against them; for in that case, as in the present, he should have felt himself constrained for the sake of example, in order to put an end to such disgraceful outrages, to have exerted the full authority of the law; nor did he know but he should have ordered it to have been carried into execution. As it now stands, the extent of his power was to order them to be transported for the term of *Fourteen Years*, to any part of his Majesty's foreign settlements to which his Majesty's Privy Council might direct; which sentence he accordingly pronounced. At the same time, he gave them to understand, if they behaved themselves, and *the tumults in the neighbourhood ceased*, they might expect the hands of mercy to be extended towards them in lessening their punishment.

*Robert Poley*, aged 16, charged with frame-breaking at Sutton-in-Ashfield, on the 13th of Novemeber last, was next brought to the bar, and pleaded guilty; in consequnece of marks of contrition the Judge sentenced him to seven years transportation.

After which, Jpseph Peck, aged 17, was put to the bar, and convicted of being concerned on the night of the 13th of Novemeber, 1811, in breaking upwards of 20 frames, in the house of Francis Bettis, and sentenced to *Fourteen years Transportation*.
```


```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002131/18120404/016/0003
Nottingham Journal - Saturday 04 April 1812 

Nottingham

At an early hour on Monday morning last, the following persons, convicted of frame-breaking, at the late Assizes, were removed from the county gaol, under the care of Mr. Wright, assisted by Parkes, Atkin, and three other Officers front Bow Street, in order to be put on board the hulks at Woolwich, (viz.) Joseph Maples, William Carnell, Benjamin Hancock, and Joseph Peck, under sentence of transportation for fourteen years; and Gervas Marshall, Robert Poley, and George Green, under sentence of transportation for seven years each. They were escorted by a detachment of hussars to Leicester, front whence they were to be guarded by the Blues to the place of their destination.—A Petition on behalf of these unfortunate individuals was sent to the Prince Regent last week, praying for mitigation of punishment, which was signed by upwards of four thousand frame-work knitters.

```


```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18120411/010/0003

Leeds Mercury - Saturday 11 April 1812

DERBY ASSIZES.— At these assizes last week, *James Tomlinson*, *Perceval Cook*, and *John England*, were found guilty of an outrage connected with the frarne-breaking system—that of forcibly entering the house of Mr. Samuel Hunt, at Ockbrook Mill, on the 23d of December last, compellinig him to sign a paper that he would lower the price of corn and flour, and robbing his house of a considerable sum in bank bills and other effects. -They were all sentenced to death, and repeatedly assured by the Judge that no hope of mercy remained to them.— *John Thompson* was found guilty of a similar offence, at the house of Thomas Theobald, at Wilsthorpe. The Judge, in passing sentence of death upon him, was peculiarly impressive, and very much affected. His Lordship said he understood that the prisoner's father had ten or eleven children, and that his grandfather now lay dead in the house of a broken heart, on account of the prisoner's abandoned conduct, and the fate that hung over him. The Judge gave him hopes of mercy, in consequence of some important discoveries he had made respecting the desperate gang with which he associated.
```


```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000317/18120418/005/0003
Northampton Mercury - Saturday 18 April 1812

Perceval Cook, and James alias Fruz, who were convicted of burglaries at Derby assizes, were executed about half-past twelve o'clock oa Friday se'nnight, pursuant their sentence, on a new drop erected in front of the county gaol, in the presence of a numerous concourse spectators.— From the time of their condemnationthey conducted themselves with the utmost propriety, and were unremittiug in their supplication obtain Divine mercy.
```


```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18120314/008/0003
Leeds Mercury - Saturday 14 March 1812

The depredations of the Machine-breakers, in the West-Riding of this county, we are sorry to find are still continued. The following is a copy of a letter from our Correspondent at Huddersfield, dated March 12:—

"In the last week, (I think on Thursday night) four houses, near Slaithwaite, were entered by the Luddites, and the frames, shears, &c. destroyed. The name of the owners I have not on the subject*. Threatening letters have been sent, of which you will soon learn the particulars.

"Last night, the houses of Mr. John Garner, of Honley; Mr. Clement Dyson, Dungeon, and Mr. Roberts, Crosland; were visit by the malcontents, and the obnoxious machinery destroyed. More troops are at this moment entering the town."

"Nottingham, March 9.—" Such is the apparent disposition, and systematic conduct of the frame breakers that, if a frame is once marked out for and destruction, its state may be said to be settled, except some step be taken by its possessor to remove the cause assigned for its condemnation; at least such are the conclusions we have a right to draw from what we daily see and hear. It has long formed a topic of conversation, that Mr. B. Topham, of Pentridge, in Derbyshire, had excited the hatred of the *Luddites*, by his activity in attempting to bring some of them to justice, in consequence of several frames being broken in his shop some time ago; and, on Saturday night last, his property became an object of their vengeance; for a party of men entered his dwelling and demolished seven pointnet lace, and three plain hose frames. I am likewise informed, that a man and his wife, who are the chief evidence against a person of the name of *Elliot*, now confined in Derby Gaol, on suspicion of frame-breaking, likewise felt the effects of their fury; and only escaped with their lives on condition of promising not to swear against the man."
```


```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002634/18120316/025/0006
London Chronicle - Monday 16 March 1812

NOTTINGHAM RIOTS. The Nottingham Papers state, that the Commission of Assize had been opened in the Shire and Town Halls, and in the latter of which, when the Grand Jury were sworn in, Mr. Justice Bayley, after complimenting the Magistrates on the smallness of the Calendar, observed, that in the two cases of frame-breaking, "that if the house, specified in the Calendar, had been entered with violence, for the purpose of frame breaking only, and no other damage had been done, the crime amounted to simple felony; but if other damage had been done, then the offence was capital." No outrage had been committed by the frame-breakers within the last few days. The ten frames broken yesterday se'nnight, at Pentridge, in Derbyshire, belonging to Mr. Topham, were in full work. The violence appears to have been owing to personal spleen, as the silk and lace pieces about the frames were much injured, his doors and windows all broken to pieces, and his own life menaced, while the violence was committing, by a number of armed men without. Mr. Topham for a short time concealed himself in a closet.

```


```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002647/18120316/008/0003
Statesman (London) - Monday 16 March 1812

Nottingham  
March 13

The Commission of Assize has just been opened in our Shire and Town Halls, and in the latter of which, when the Grand Jury were sworn in, Mr. Justice Bailey addressed them to the following effect:— His Lordship began by complimenting the Magistracy and character of the town, on the smallness of the Calendar, except two cases respecting frame-breaking, and one, connected in some degree with that crime, which was for writing a threatening letter

On the two former cases, his Lordship observed, that if the house, specified in the Calendar, had been entered with violence, for the purpose of frame-breaking only, *and no other damage had been done*, the crime amounted to simple felony; but if other damage bad been done, then the offence was capital. On the subject of the threatening letter, his Lordship observed, that if the evidence was perfectly clear to their view of the question, then they would find a bill; if not, he hoped they would not find against the Prisoner; as cases of this sort should not be brought before a petty Jury, except on the clearest evidence. At the same time he most strenuously enjoined the Gentlemen of the Jury, equally to lay aside all prejudice against the Prisoner, and all fear, from whatever quarter, for having done their duty.

It has been asserted in the House of Commons by Mr. Wynne, and supported by Mr. John Smith, that the Frame-breaking Bill has already had a bad effect, by partly closing up the channels of private Information against the perpetrators. If this is really the case, what good, we would ask, is to be expected from its influence? for its terrors have not had the effect of stopping the breaking of frames. If, however, these observations should fall into the hands of the misguided men alluded to, we most earnestly hope that they will take a timely hint, and cease from their destructive and dangerous practices. For, independent of the disquietude such conduct must give to every man's mind, who is concerned in it, on account of the danger of detection, most assured we are that its further prosecution will be attended with the most fatal consequences to the future prosperity of this town and neighbourhood. May our solicitations in this respect not be made is vain !

On Saturday night, seven lace and three plain frames were broken at Pentridge, in Derbyshire, which were in the possession of Benjamin Topham, of that place; and, what makes the case peculiarly distressing is, the lace frames were the fruit of his own industry. He calculates, that they will cost him 25*l.* each to put them again in working condition. His shop had been twice visited before by the framebreakers; but the first time, they were prevailed upon to desist from all violence; the second time, he was less fortunate, for three lace frames were destroyed belonging to a hosier of this town, and two of his own slightly injured; he having driven them away by ringing a bell in the church, and thereby exciting an alarm. But having notice, by some means, that his life was threatened, he thought it prudent, on this third attack, to consult his own personal safety, and of course offered no extraordinary obstacle to the exercise of their violence; indeed, while the mischief was going on, he heard his life threatened by many voices. The windows and doors of his house were likewise broken to shivers; and the silk and lace pieces, about the frames, received considerable injury. What frames were at work, were employed on double press net, and at the full price; therefore, the fair conclusion is, that the violence had its origin in personal spleen; which, according to his own declaration, as far as his knowledge goes, has been raised against him without any cause whatsoever. The same night two frames were broken at Losco, about four miles on this side Pentridge; and on Tuesday night, one was carried clean away from Basford.
```


```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002634/18120320/025/0007
London Chronicle - Friday 20 March 1812 Topham frames broken

DERBYSHIRE RIOTS.— On Saturday night the 7th inst. seven lace and three plain frames were broken at Pentridge, in Derbyshire, which were in the possession of B. TOPHAM, of that place; and, what makes the same peculiarly distressing is, these lace frames were the fruit of his own industry. He calculates, that they will cost him 25*l.* each to put them again in working condition. His shop had been twice visited before by the frame-breakers; but the first time, they were prevailed upon to desist from all violence; the second time, he was less fortunate, for three lace-frames were destroyed belonging to a hosier of Nottingham, and two of his own slightly injured; he having driven the offenders away by ringing a bell in the church, and thereby exciting an alarm. But having notice, by some means, that his life was threatened, he thought it prudent, on this third attack, to consult his own personal safety, and of course offered no extraordinary obstacle to the exercise of their violence; indeed, while the mischief was going on, he heard his life threatened by many voices. The windows and doors of his house were likewise broken to shivers; and the silk and lace pieces about the frames received considerable injury. On the same night, a man and his wife, at Swanwick, who are expected to be the principle evidences against two persons confined in Derby gaol, on suspicion of frame-breaking, were visited, as it is supposed, by the same party, who assailed their dwelling broke their furniture to pieces, and in some degree injured their persons. They have been removed to Derby as a place of safety. The same night two frames were broken at Losca; and on Tuesday night one was carried away from Basford.
```
