# Walter Thornbury, *Abraham Thornton and the Final Wager of Battle*



https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.41560/page/n235/mode/2up Old Stories Retold
by Thornbury, Walter

Publication date 1879
pp.228-241

WAGER OF BATTLE. THE TRIAL OF ABRAHAM THORNTON FOR THE MURDER OF MARY ASHFORD.

Also in https://archive.org/details/sim_all-the-year-round_1867-05-18_17_421/mode/2up All the Year Round  1867-05-18: Vol 17 Iss 421
pp. 495-501

WAGES OF BATTLE. THE TRIAL OF ABRAHAM THORNTON FOR THE MURDER OF MARY ASHFORD.

On a bleak acclivity seven miles to the north-east of that vast centre of industry, Birmingham, there is a small town named Sutton Coldfield, a place of about four thousand inhabitants. On Monday, the 26th of May, 1817, Mary Ashford, a blooming girl of about twenty years of age, acting as servant to her uncle, a small farmer named Coleman, who lived at Langley Heath, in the parish of Sutton Coldfield, and three miles from Erdington, prepared to start for Birmingham market on some errands for the family. This servant-girl, standing before the bedroom glass in her pink frock, scarlet spencer, and little straw bonnet streaming with primrose-coloured ribbons, is in more than a girl's usual flutter of pretty vanity and holiday excitement; for that night, being WhitMonday night, there will be the annual clulvfcast and dance at Tyburn House (an inn), a mile from Erdington, and she will meet there all the young beaux of half a dozen miles round, and, above all, a young man whom she has often seen on Sundays — that thickset, sturdy young bricklayer, Abraham Thornton, a farmer's son at Erdington. Smiling at her own pretty reflection in the glass, Mary Ashford looks over her shoulder (after the manner of girls) to see that her shawl sets well, ruffles out her bonnet-bows, and, with little quick birdlike touches, arranges her glossy hair and the set of her pink gown. Then she ties up in a bundle her clean frock, white spencer, and white stockings, for the dance in the evening, trips away at last, with a merry laugh at her uncle's warnings to be home early, and runs singing down the green lane, happy and innocent as a bird the first day it can use its wings.

At about ten o'clock that May morning, when thrushes are singing, hedges flowering, and everything is happy and rejoicing, Mary Ashford calls on her friend, Hannah Cox, servant to Mr. Machin, to leave her bundle at her (Hannah's) mother's, who lived opposite. She is to call in the evening on her way from market, change her dress, and go to the dance at Tyburn with her friend. At about six Mary Ashford returns, changes her dress, dons the clean*coloured frock and the white spencer, puts on a new pair of Hannah's shoes, and between seven and eight sets out, full of anticipation, pretty girlish chatter, and surmise.

The club-feast at Daniel Clarke's inn (Tyburn House— ill-omened name) was, like all other cluMeasts, as bad a place for an innocent young woman as could well be. The house would ring with tipsy shouts, the windows shake witJi the competing shuffles of the dancers. They are always alike, these club-revels: owlish old men sit outside on the ale benches, the young wild striplings of the place, half drunk, arc bragging and quarrelling ; the low-roofed room is reeking with smoko ; the ale is passing round much too fast ; the, language is coarse; all bii the women are fevered or besotted vv'ith beer. There is nothing healthy or honest about the amusements, but, on the contrary, everything degradedly stupid, drunken, raffish," and debasing.

Hannah Cox, rather frightened at the revel, remained upstairs with her sister, and only stayed in the lower room a quarter of an hour, Just to see a dance or two, and who was thc>rc. She did not observe Thornton. But the dancingroom had some magnetic attraction for poor Mary, and she stayed there all the time. A little before eleven, Hannah thought it time for respectable girls to go, and came down to look for Mary. She met her at the door of the room, when Mary said she would not be long, but would come to her soon. Hannah then walked about twenty yards on the road, and waited on the bridge. Presently a man named Benjamin Carter came out, and Hannah, getting restless, sent him in to call Mary. Soon after, Mary came out with Abraham Thornton. She was going to sleep at her grandfather's, and walked homewards first, followed by Carter and Hannah. Carter walked a little way further, and then went back to the revel. Near an inn called the Old Cuckoo, Hannah lost sight of Mary and her young man. On reaching her mother's house at Erdington, Hannah went calmly to bed. In the morning, at twenty minutes to five by the cottage clock, Hannah was awoke by a knocking at the door. She went down, and found it was Mary Ashford, calm and in good spirits, and in

the same dress as she had danced in the night before. As Mary changed her dress and put on again the old pink frock and scarlet spencer in which she had gone to market on the day before, she told Hannah she had slept at her grandfather's at the top of Bell Lane. She then wrapped her boots up in her pocket-handkerchief, tied the rest of her dress and some marketing things in a napkin, and, after staying about a quarter of an hour chatting, went away.

Poor Mary, no longer honest, no longer pure, no longer happy, had deceived Hannah. She had not slept at her grandfather's; she had been about the whole night, 1 ambling here and there with Thornton. John Humpidge, a labourer of Whitton, leaving a friend's house at Penn's Mills about a quarter before three, saw Thornton and u girl at the "fordrift," at a stile leading into Boll Lane. Humpidge wished Thornton good-morning, but the girl held her head determinately down, and the largo bonnet hid her face. This girl was Mary Ashford; of that, there can be no doubt. It is beyond dispute. Thomas Aspre, a man of Erdington, on his way to Birmingham that morning, crossed Boll Lane, leaving it on his right and Erdington on his \g% It was about half-past three; he then saw Mary alone, walking very fast past a horse pond in the lane, in the direction of Mrs. Butler's, at whose house she called to change her dress. At about four the lost girl was seen by another Erdington labourer, named Dawson, coming from Erdington. John Kesterton, a farmer s man at Erdington, who had got up soon after two to fettle " his horses, harnessed them to the waggon at four, and watered them at the pond in Bell Lane. At a quarter-past four, Kesterton turned the horses round, and made straight for Birmingham, through Erdington. Turning by some chance impulse to look back a little past Mrs. Butler's — for the road was qui(d and lonely enough at that hour — he saw Mary Ashford, whom he knew well, coming out of the entry to widow Butler's cottage. He smacked his whip to make her skrtle, and she turned and looked at him. No one was with her. She passed up Bell Lane, and seemed to be in a great hurry. She had on a straw bonnet and a scarlet spencer, and carried a bundle in her left hand. The road she took led both to her grandfather's, where she ought to have slept, and her uncle's, to whom she was servant.

At five o'clock George Jackson, a Birmingham gun-borer, who had left Moor Street, Birmingham, on his way beyond Penn's Mills to seek work, came past the workhouse at Erdington. He turned out of Bell Lane about half-past six into the fordtrift leading to Penn's Mills, going along the foot-

Toad till he came to a pit close by the footpath. As he came near it he observed, to his extreme horror, in the pure morning sunlight, a bonnet, a pair of shoes, and a bundle, close by the slope that overhung the pit : one shoe was all over blood. The pit was in a grass-field, separated from the carriage-road only by a hedge, and near a stile. The things were about a foot below the top of the slope, and about four yards below spread the dark water of the pit-mouth. There had evidently been a murder, and the body must lie weltering in that pool. Jackson, frightened instantly ran to Penn's Mills, half a mile off, for assistance ; but at the nearest house, findings man named Lawell coming out, he told him to stop and guard the things while he ran to the mills. Some labourers came fi^rattho mills and passed an eel-rake through the water. Yes, there it was — a woman's body, duckweed and loaves and mud on the pale cold face. It was poor Mary Ashford, recognized in a moment by her scarlet spencer and pink go^vn; murdered beyond a doubt; her clothes were steeped in blood. She bad been abused, then murdered. That was the universal belief.

One of the workmen at Penn's Mills instantly went along the harrowed field beyond the pit to sec if he could trace the footsteps of the poor girl and her murderer. Going to the pit from Erdington he found footprints of a woman and a man; they wore close together, and appeared like the footprints of persons running, both by the stride and the depth of the impressions. Near the pit, the footprints doubled backwards and forwards, as if one person had chased the other. The footsteps were trackable near the grass, hut not on it, and were visible on the harrowed ground. The prints were traceable on the grass by a dry pit, lho]i towards a water-pit in the harrowed field. The woman's steps were nearest the pit. The footprints of a man were also visible the contrary way, as if running back o]iq the harrowed ground to the gate at the far corner across the footpath, which led over a clover-field towards Pipe Hall, and by a short cut to Castle Bromwich. There was a man's footprint near the edge of the declivity ; there was blood about forty yards off the pit, and some as near as fourteen yards ; there was also a track of blood lying thick upon the clover in the direction of the pit. The footpath was about one hundred and forty yards from the dry j>it on ono side, and the wet pit on the other.

Thornton was instantly arrested, and examined at Tyburn, the scene of that unhappy revel. He owned to guilty association with the girl, and at once made the following statement :

He said he was "a bricklayer; that he came to the Three Tuns at Tyburn about six o^clock the night before, where there was a dance ; that he danced a dance or two with the landlord's daughter, but whether he danced with Mary Ashford or not he could not recollect. Examinant stayed till about twelve o'clock ; he then went away with Mary Ashford, Benjamin Carter, and a young woman, whom he understood to he Mr. Machin's housekeeper, of Erdington; that they walked together as far as Mr. Potter's ; Carter and the housekeeper went on towards Erdington, examinant and Mary Ashford wont on as far as Mr. Freeman's; they then turned to the right, and went along a lane till they came to a gate and stile on the right-hand side of the road ; they then went over the stile, and into the next piece, aIon%tl]p foot-road; they continued along the foot-road four or five fields, but cannot exactly tell how many. Examinant and Mary Ashford then returned the same road; when they came to the gate and stile, they first got over ; they stood there ten minutes or a quarter of an hour talking; it might be then about three o'clock. "Whilst they stood there a man came by (examinant did not know who) ; he had on a jacket of a brown colour ; the man was coming along the footpath they had returned ^ along ; examinant said, ^ Good-morning,' and the man said 'the same; examinant asked Mary Ashford if she knew the man; she did not know whether she knew him or not,

I i.i liioiight he was one who had been at Tyburn; that examinant and Mary Ashford stayed at the stile a quarter of an hour afterwards; they then went straight up to Mr. Freeman's again, crossed the road, and went on towards Erdington, till he came to a grass-field on the right-hand side the road, within about a hundred yards of Mr. Greensall's, in Erdington; Mary Ashford walked on; examinant never saw her afterwards.

It was nearly oiiposite to Mr. Greensall's. Whilst he was in the field he saw a man cross the road to James's, but he did not know who he was; he f Thornton) then \veut on for Erdington W^'orkhouse to see if ne could sec Mary Ashford ; he stopped upon the green about five minutes to wait for her ; it was four o'clock, or ten minutes after four o'clock. Examinant w^ent by Shipley's, on his road home, and afterwards by John Holden's, where he saw a man and woman with some milkcans, and a young man driving some cows out of a field, whom ^ lu' thought to be Holden's son. He then went towards Mr. Twamley's mill, where he saw Mr. Hatton's keeper taking rubbish out of the nets at the flood-gates. He asked the man what o'clock it was ; he answered, ^Near five o'clock, or five.' He knew the keeper. Twamley's mill is about a mile and a

quarter from his father's house, with whom he lives. The first person he saw was Edward Leake, a servant of his father's, and a boy ; his mother was up. He took oif a black coat he had on, and put on the one he now wears, which hung up in the kitchen, changed his hat, and left them both in the house; he did not change his shoos or stockings, though his shoes were rather wet from having walked across the meadows. That examinant knew Mary Ashford when she lived at the Swan at Erdington, but was not particularly intimate with her; he had not seen Mary Ashford for a considerable time before he met her at Tyburn. Examinant had been drinking tJie whole evening, but not so much as to be intoxicated."

Abraham Thornton, against whom public opinion ran high, was tried for the murder of Mary Ashford, before Mr. Justice llolroyd, at the Warwick assizes, on August 8th, Mr. Reynolds appearing for the defence. The prosecution chiefly relied on the deceased having been last seen with the prisoner in the holds not long before she called at Butler's and changed her dress. Great stress was also laid on the footmarks in the newly harrowed field adjoining the pit where the poor girl's body was found. T'hcy exactly fitted Thornton's and Mary Ashford's shoes. There were some nails projecting from the side of one of Thornton's shoes, and the traces of those two nails were visible in several of the footsteps, particularly in one in which a bit of short stick had thrown the foot up. It was also proved that the prisoner had spoken to a man at the Tyburn House dance, and asked who Mary Ashford was, then recognizing her as having been a servant at the Swan Inn, Erdington, declared that he should go homo with her that night, as he had known her sister before. He was dancing with her when Hannah Cox, after waiting half an hour at the bridge for Mary, had sent Carter for her.

Black as these things looked, the defence was very able and very convincing. It was contended that little stress could be laid on the footprints. Labourer's shoos, made by the same shoemaker, almost exactly resemble each other. Moreover, so many persons from ronn's Mills had crowded to the field and pit on hearing of the murder, that all means of identifying the first footprints were soon destroyed. All the footprints, in fact, except two that were at once covered with boards, were effaced by a heavy thunderstorm that broke soon after over the scene of guilt. If Thornton's story wore true, the footprints wore really his and Mary Ashford's, for they had been in those fields on their way from Tyburn House. Mary Ashford left Butler's house at nineteen minutes after four*

At about half-past four Thornton was seen by William Jennens, a milkman, as he was milking cows at Mr. Holden's farm, passing towards the meadows leading to Castle Bromwich. He was walking very gently, and was not at all heated or agitated. About five minutes after five John Heydon, gamekeeper to John Butter, Esq., at Castle Bromwich, saw Thornton- as he (Heydon) was taking up the flood-gates and examining the nets at Castle Bromwich Mill. Thornton told the keeper lie had been taking a girl homo from the Tyburn club. He was sober, and did not appear heated, but said he was "much tired." He stayed a quarter of an hour talking. Xle then went on in the direction of his father's house. The Bromwich stable-clock was proved to have been fifteen minutes faster than Birmingham time; it was, therefore, only seven or eight minutes before five when Thornton spoke to the keeper. It was, therefore, wisely and convincingly contended that it was impossible the prisoner, between nineteen minutes past four and twenty-five or thirty minutes past four, when he was sc(in hy the milkman, could have abused and murdered Mary Ashford, and got over the intervening distance.

The distances were most material in the case, and must be examined before Thornton's case can be fully understood. Mary's nearest road to the pit from Butler's house measured one mile two furlongs and thirty-eight yards. From the pit to Holden's, even across hedge and ditch, was one mile four furlongs sixty-ono yards. But then the hedges would have delayed him, and, taking the way a murderer would probably have gone for expedition, the distance would have been two miles two furlongs forty-seven yards from the pit to Holden's, making a total distance of three miles four furlongs eighty-five yards. This calculation, which is bound on all sides by the most stringent observation, left only eleven minutes for the deceased's walk from Butler's house to the pit, for the assault, the death, and the struggle, after a pursuit (as the prosecution surmised), and the carrying the girl's body thirty yards to the pit, and placing the bundle and shoes on the slope. To do all this, Thornton, a stout short man with clumsy legs, must have leaped over the country at the rate of fifteen miles an hour. It was also proved that deceased had no wound or bruise upon her, and that the blood found proceeded from natural causes. Mr. Sadler, the prisoner's solicitor, complained much at the time of the cruel reports spread against Thornton, the pamphlets and songs, that rendered it difficult to find an unbiassed jury. The county magistrates themselves were strongly prejudiced against Thornton, and had pursued their investigations with the acrimony of

partisans, who had quite made up their mind that Thornton had abused and murdered Mary Ashford after she left Butler's house; although it was proved (by circumstances which we need not recapitulate) that Thornton and the girl had been together all night, and that Mary Ashford had returned to her friend with a Jie in her mouth, smiling, and without a word of complaint.

It also appears that a certain rash and hasty county magistrate went to Birmingham jail and reproached Thornton for having denied that he had seen the girl again after she went home to dress. He also expressed his astonishment at Thornton being aji^le to eat (he was at dinner), and said to him, very unwisely—

You'll be hanged, and your body will be given to the surgeons to be dissected; you've long deserved it, for you've cost your father many a hundred pounds before for getting you out of scrapes like this."

It was also clear that the deceased could have thrown her- self from the bank six feet high into the water. There was no sign of a struggle near the pit, and although there were two labourers' houses within a hundred and fifty yards of the pit, and men wore Ixiginiiing to stir for milking, bird-minding, and stable-cleaning, there were no cries for help heard, notwithstanding Mary Ashford was a vigorous and robust girl in the prime of life.

The prisoner's conduct after leaving Mary Ashford was quiet and straightforward. He got home about five. He then changed his black coat for a damson-coloured one, but did not change his shoes or stockings, though the former were wet. When arrested at Ion o'clock, he at once confessed he had spent the night with Mary Ashford, but said lie had left her near Butler's, and gone home after having waited five minutes for her on Erdington Green. There was nothing to impugn this statement, and Thornton was acquitted by the jury.

In reviewing tin's intensely interesting case, earnestly, Judicially, and dispassionately, we are fully of opinion that the verdict was a just oue. It is true Thornton confessed that he waited to see the girl on her way to her uncle's; but he could not have committed the crime (for which there was no motive), and arrived calm and cool at the flood-gates in the time. There is only One who will over know who committed that cruel crime — ^if it were a crime; but let us examine the worst possible conjectures. If Thornton murdered the girl, lie must have mot her again, assaulted her, then thrown her, while fainting, into the pit, to prevent

discovery; but her previous guilt renders this unlikely. Or, she might have pressed him to promise marriage, and he in a rage might have thrown her into the pit ; but if this remorse were on her mind, how could she have returned in such good spirits to her friend at Butler's? Three other conjectures (reconcilable with Thornton's innocence) seem to us more reasonable.

First, she might have been assaulted and murdered by some rambling tramp from Birmingham, or some labourer on his way to work. Tramps can easily escape, for they leave no clue; labourers have a right to be out early, in the fields. But, then, why were the things placed deli'xcrately on the edge of the slope? By design of the murderer? We doubt it. ^ V

Secondly, did not Mary Ashford try to go down to the water to wash, and, in the attempt, accidentally drown herself?

Thirdly (and this we think is the most probable), the girl alone, the excitement of the guilty revel and its fatal consequences gone off, the flush of perhaps more beer and spirits than a country girl was in the habit of taking having passed away, there came a sudden pang— a bitter and unbearable pang of conscience — an awakening of innocent horror at th(i night and its results— a dread of consequences, of shame, of discovery ; then one look round of bitter parting at the fields, the sky, the awakening birds, and the dewy flowers ; a hurried placing down of the bundle, the shoes, and the bonnet, and a desperate plunge into death.

Had there been a struggle, short as it might have been, there must have been traces of it at the pit's edge, and there would have been bruises on the girl's throat or chest.

Public feeling was, however, far too much sot on Thornton's death, to be satisfied with this verdict of acquittal.

A letter-press description, strongly coloured, together with a sketch of the pit and a drawing of Mary Ashford, were published by Mr. Innes, and engraved by Mr. Radcliffe, of Birmingham. A hot-pressed map (15 by 11) also appeared, and An Antidote to Prejudice "was followed by An Investigation of the Case."* The Rev. Luke Booker also published a moral review of the conduct and case of Mary Ashford, in refutation of the arguments adduced in defence of her supposed violator and murderer, which concluded with: "A proposed Epitaph . — As a warning to female virtue, this monument is erected over the remains of Mary Ashford, a young woman chaste as she was beautiful, who, in the twentieth year of her age, having incautiously repaired to a

scene of amusement, without proper protection, was brutally violated and murdered on the 27th of May, 1817, in the parish of Aston,

"'Lovely and chaste as is the primrose palo,

Kiflod of virgin sweetness by the gale,

Mary ! The wretch, who thee remorseless slew,

Will surely God's avenging wrath pursue.

For, though the deed of blood be veiled in night,

" Will not the Judge of all the earth do right P **

Fair, blighted flower ! The muse, that weeps thy doom, jtoars o'er thy sleeping dust this warning tomb I " '

To answer the last-named work there was published A Itoply to the Remarks of the Rev. Luke Booker, LL.D., in a pamphlet entitled Moral Review of the Conduct and Case of Mary Ashford, etc. By a Friend to Justice."

There also appeared, "Observations upon the case of Abraham Thornton, etc.; showing the danger of pressing presumptive evidence too far, together with the only true and authentic account yet published of the evidence given at the trial, the examination of the prisoner, etc. And a correct plan of the hru/t in qno. By Edward Holroyd, of Cray's Inn."

There were also two very wild dramas on the subject: one of thorn entitled "The Murdered Maid; or, The Clock Struck Four! A drama in three acts." The other, "The Mysterious Murder; or, What's the Clock? A melodrama in three acts. Founded on a tale too true."

Funds were procured, and a clover local solicitor, raking up an old unrepealed statute, induced the brother of Mary Ashford, as her heir, to take proceedings for an "appeal of murder" against Abraham Thornton, who was arrested by the sheriff of Warwick on the 1st of October. On the 16th of November term, William Ashford appeared in the Court of King's Bench, at Westminster, as appellant, and Abraham Thornton was brought up on a writ of habeas corpus as appellee. Mr. Reynolds and Mr. Reader defended Thornton. Lord Ellenborough and the other judges took their seats at eleven. Ashford's counsel wore Messrs. Clarke, Gurney, and Chitty. Ashford was a short, slight-made man of twenty, with sandy hair and blue eyes; Thornton, a short, very fat, robust man, with full cheeks, fresh complexion, and a confident smile on his by no means forbidding countenance. the court was densely crowded, and the place almost taken by storm. Lord Yarmouth and Lord Montford were conspicuous among the spectators.

There was a vague feeling that the old trial by ordeal was

to be revived — single combat in the lists — a tournament in^ full plate armour, with trumpets blowing, and the law-judges standing by to cheer on the two combatants; the drowsiest and most briefless old lingerer on the back benches at the Westminster court kindled with curiosity, and began to pore over Bracton and Spelman for the last precedent of such an extraordinary way of discovering the innocence or guilt of a prisoner who had already stood his trial.

Mr. Lo Blanc concluded the reading of the record by saying, "Are you guilty or not guilty of the said felony and murder w^hereof you stand so appealed? Mr. EeaVler then put into the prisoner's hand a slip of paper, from which he read, "Not guilty; and I am ready to defend the same with my body." Mr. Reader had likewise hundred a pair of large gauntlets or gloves to the prisoner, one of which he put on, and the other, in pursuance of the old form he threw down for the appellant to take up. The glove was not taken up. Ashford's counsel disputed the right of Thornton to "wager of battle," and were ready to fight it out with tongues and not spears.

Mr. Le Blanc: Your plea is, that you are not guilty, and that you are ready to defend that plea with your body?

The prisoner: It is.

The appellant then stood up in front of Mr. Clarke.

Lord Ellenborough: What have you got to say, Mr. Clarke?

Mr. Clarke: I did not expect, my lord, at this time of day, that this sort of demand would have been made. I must confess that I am surprised that the charge against the prisoner should be put to issue in this way. The trial by battle is an obsolete practice, which has long since been out of use, and it would appear to me extraordinary indeed, if the person who has murdered the sister should, as the law exists in these enlightened times, be allowed to prove his innocence by murdering the brother also, or, at least, by an attempt to do so.

Lord Ellenborough: It is the law of England, Mr. Clarke; we must not call it murder.

Mr. Clarke: I may have used too strong an expression, my lord, in saying murdering the brother; but, at all events, it is no less than killing. 1 apprehend, however, that the course' lo be taken is in a great measure discretionary; and it will be for the court to determine, under all the circumstances, whether they will permit a battle to be waged in this case or not.

Mr. Clarke then put in a counter-plea that the applicant

was incompetent, from youth and want of bodily strength^ to fairly meet the appellee in battle, and trusted the court would waive the right of battle, and direct a new trial by

jury*

On November 22nd the case again came on, and Ashford counter- pleaded that there were circumstances which induced the most violent presumption of Thornton's guilt, and that in such cases the law was that he could not be permitted to wage battle, but must be tried by his country. The proceedings were postponed till the next term. This interim hiw>ersAll over England devoted to antiquarian researches into tlujabsurd old custom revived as a clever checkmate to the ini^iitous persecution of an acquitted man. It was found that in Spelmaii's time there had been a quashed case of the same kind. In ^Icftstrelet, a case was discovered in which Erunecto, a gentleman of Hainault, charged Soltior Bernaige, a gentleman of Flanders, with murder. Bruncctc overcame In's adversary, forced him to confess his crime, aiul gave him over t,o the headsman. Then in 8t. Palavers Mernoires sur I'Anciennc Chcvallerio th(!y discovered the case of the Dog of Montargis (since distinguished on the stage), who in judicial combat forced the Chevalier Macaire to confess the murder of his (the dog's) master, the Chevalier Aiibri de Montdidier. Sliakospoare's Henry the Sixtli furnished another instance. Dngdale, Bracton, and Flela all agreed that the fullowijig was the form the trial should assume: If the appellant took up his glove, the defendant would lay his right hand on the (Tospels, and taking hold of the appellant's right hand with his left, would swear that he did not commit the murder. The appellant, with the same formula, would assert tlio guilt of the defendant, kissing the book as he repeated the oath. The lists were to be sixty feet siiuare, the sides, duo north, south, cast, and Avest. Places Averc to he provided for the judges and the bar. On the day fixed the court Avas to proceed to the lists from "Westminster Hall at sunrise, the judges in their full robes. When they Avere seaUid, proclamation Avould be made for the combatants, who were then to appear Avitli bare heads, arms, and legs, each led by a person carrying his baton of an ell long, and tipped with horn, and preceded by another carrying his square double-leather target. On entering the iisls, the combatants were to make conges to the judges, and take the following absurd oath against witchcraft and sorcery:

"Hear this, ye justices, that I, , have this day neither

ate nor drunk, nor have upon me bone, stone, nor grass, nor have done anything, nor any other for me, whereby the law

of God may be depressed, and the law of the devil exalted. So help me God!"

Then, after a proclamation of silence, under pain of imprisonment for a year and a day, the combat was to begin, and to continue till either party was vanquished, or till the stars appeared in the evening. If the appellant was defeated, he would be subject to a year's imprisonment and fine, and must make restitution as damages; but if the appellant turned craven, and gave up the fight, he became infamous, and lost the privileges of a freeman. If the defendant was defeated, he was to be instantly executed— nor could even the king pardon him; but if he was victorious, ftr could maintain the fight till the evening, he was to be honourably acquitted.

There was also much serious and very angry discussion as to whether Blackstone was right in thinking that the wager of battle was originally a Saxon substitute for the weregild, or compensation money ; or whether it had not rather been a substitute for the Norman trial by combat.

On the 24th of January, 1818, the vexed case was again tried. Thornton replied, stating all the facts in his favour, and claimed a right to the combat. On the 29th it was again discussed ; and on February 7th, Mr. Tyndall appeared for the defendant. On April 16th, Lord Ellenborough gave the final decision. He said —

The general law of the land is that there shall be a trial by battle in cases of appeal, unless the party brings himself within some of the exceptions. The only exception relied on ill this case is the exception with indereiico to the case in Bracton, which relates to a case so clear as to exclude all doubt, and would not admit of jiroof to the contrary, by means whereof the party never could deny the fact alleged. the discussion which lias taken place here, and the consideration which has been given to the facts alleged, most conclusively show that this is not a case that can admit of no denial or proof to the contrary; under those circumstances, however obnoxious I am myself to the trial by battle, it is the moilo of trial which we, in our judicial character, are bound to award. Wo are delivering the law as it is, and not as we wish it to bo, and therefore wo must pronounce our judgment, that the battle must take place, unless the party reserves for our consideration whether, under the circumstances of the case, the defendant is entitled to go wHlumt a dag, which is a point for further consideration ; and on the part of the appellant it shall be considered necessary to advise on that point. At present we pronounce that there be trial by battle, unless

he appellant show reason why the defendant should not depart without a day."

On April 21st, Ashford not having accepted the wager of battle, the appeal was urged, and Thornton was discharged. The crowd were so threatening and turbulent, that he had to be concealed in a private room until they dispersed.

This was the last instance of trial by battle being demanded in an English court. In the following session, the rusty old act of parliament under which the appeal was made, was repealed. Wager of battle had only been snatched up as a weapon of defence, exciting as great astonishment in Thornton's adversaries as the bows and arrows used by a Tartar regimejn at Austerlitz produced on the Grenadiers of Napoleon. It is a pity that our statute-hook should still contain sections as mischievous and dead as that page of whose removal wo have given the brief history.

Poor Mary Ashford's grave at Sutton Coldfield is still a place of pilgrimage for holiday visitors from Birmingham. The tombstone, with the epitaph before given, was erected by subscription. As for Thornton, who had up to this time l)een respected at Erdington, he went to America, where he followed his trade of a bricklayer, married, throve, had children, and died some years ago. In the January only of this very year (1867), William Ashford, the brother of the murdered girl, and for many years a fish-hawker, was found dead in his bed in Now .John Street, Birmingham. He was seventy years old. The causes of Mary Ashford's death, only the Last Bay can now reveal.

https://archive.org/details/sim_all-the-year-round_1867-07-06_18_428/page/38/mode/2up
All the Year Round  1867-07-06: Vol 18 Iss 428

p.39

NOTE.—Wager of Battle.—At page 498 of the volume just issued, the author of Old Stories Re-told attributes to the Rev. Mr. Bedford an injudicious visit to the prisoner Thornton. It has been since ascertained that the anecdote must have applied to some one else, for Mr. Bedford had not taken orders at the time that Abraham Thornton was charged with the murder of Mary Ashford. This correction is made in justice to the memory of a much-respected clergyman.