# 

? was this still thornbury?

https://archive.org/details/sim_all-the-year-round_1867-06-08_17_424/mode/2up?q=%22old+stories+re-told%22

All the Year Round  1867-06-08: Vol 17 Iss 424
Publication date 1867-06-08

pp. 559-

OLD STORIES RE-TOLD. PETERLOO.

On Saturday, the 3lst of July, 1819, the Manchester reformers, wishing to appoint Orator Hunt "legislatorial attorney" for their city, issued an advertisement in the Manchester Observer inviting their friends to meet on the 9th of August in the area near St. Peter's Church ; the alarmed magistrates pronounced the meeting illegal, and warned the citizens on their peril to abstain from attending it. Meanwhile, as the magistrates had refused to attend to the petition from the reformers for a meeting, the original promoters gave notice that a meeting would take place in St. Peter's Field on Monday, the 16th of August; Mr. Hunt. in the chair.

Before we proceed, let us look back a little. There can be no doubt that the Spafields riots of 1816, trifling as they were (for the thirty thousand rioters did nothing but plunder a baker or two and a gun-shop), had ve much alarmed the Tory party and Lord Sidmouth, as they showed a restless discontent and an angry impatience for reform—very natural, as it seems to us now, but very irritating to the Chinese politicians then. It must, indeed, be allowed, that about this time the frequent arrests of supposed conspirators had converted many violent men into rous plotters; but broken down swindlers like Thistlewood were not the men by whom our modern reforms were really originated. The pressure of the old war still lay like a heavy nightmare on the industry of England. Firm after firm went down like card-houses in 1818 and 1819. The cotton-spinners who had traded during high prices were ruined in ene numbers, and their workmen suffered with them On the 13th of July, 1819, when the Prince Regent (a man at the head of the country, but at the tail of the age) prorogued parliament, he spoke of the disaffection in the manufacturing districts, and propounded that great axiom still so popular with the Anglo-Chinese politician, that no disaffected persons, meeting under the pretence of reform, had in reality any other object than the subversion of the constitution. It was this notion, highly convenient to all opposers of pro-

38, that set the unreasoning sabres going at Peterloo. The proclaiming political opponents as seditious and dangerous persons is one of the most ingenious stratagems ever adopted by the opponents of progress, and is a trick by no means yet played out.

The manufacturing labourer is by no means

so stupid as the agricultural labourer, and h

is not so patient of his political deprivations and of starvation. In July, 1818, the Manchester spinners, restless under their distress, had begun to realise the necessity of organisation and of united action. Unable to resist the oppressions of greedy wealth, hunger had driven them to union. They met daily ; they subscribed to support each other during strikes; they chose delegates. These meetings sometimes led to dangerous collisions. In September, 1818, the spinners, pelting the windows of Messrs. Gray's factory, near Ancoats-street, were fired at by the inmates, and several were dangerously wounded. Dragoons then dispersed the mob. About the same time, a riot at Barnsley was put down, after the rioters had broken open the town prison and rescued a rioter who had been velaod,

In 1819 several irritating events had happened. In January, Hunt had been beaten in the Manchester theatre by some Hussar officers, under the pretence that he had hissed when "God save the King" was called for. Later,in the year, some reform speakers at Glasgow had proposed to march to London, and present a petition in person to the Prince Regent. On the 19th of July, Sir Charles Wolseley, a violent politician, was arrested. He had been elected legislatorial attorney and representative of Birmingham. On the 22nd, a constable named Buck was shot by some workmen at Stockport, in their efforts to secure a reform orator who was in the constable's custody.

Both sides were going too far. The law was becoming illegal, the reformers were growing violent and seditious. The word "Radical" was now first used to indicate reformers who struck at the root of political abuses. Female reform societies were founded at Blackburn. The reformers began also to practise systematic drilling. Among the honest and quiet men there was no mischief meant by this drilling, whatever the younger and more fanatical might secretly plan. The Tory press had, with the insolence peculiar to that 'age, derided the oppressed working men with their rags and dirt, and the confusion and scramble of their mobs. The opprobrious epithet, "swinish multitude," got into vogue. The drill was introduced to preserve order and peace. It was adopted first solely with a view to the great Manchester meeting. It was practised at Bury, Bolton, and Rochdale. The pent-up weavers and spinners liked the exercise. That frank, honest man, Bamford, who was often present at these drills, says, in his fresh, pleasant way:

"When dusk came, and we could no longer see to work, we jumped from our looms, rushed to the sweet cool air of the fields, or the waste lands, or the green lane-sides; or, in the grey of a fine Sunday morn, we would saunter through the mists, fragrant with the night odour of flowers or new hay, and, ascending the Tandle hills, salute the ies sun as he climbed from behind the high moors of Saddleworth."

There were no arms used; there was no concealment ; there was no midnight muster ; there

was, to the bulk, no double-dealing at all in the matter. Sometimes a youngster would brag and talk violently, or as the men clapped their hands when they stood at ease, some would call it "firing;" that was all; but that was sufficient for spies.

The long wished-for Monday came at last. Many a fly-shuttle ceased for that day to dart across the loom. Bamford has left us, in his History of a Radical, a vivid description of the spirit in which the workmen from the villages round Manchester joined the procession, and the almost solemn manner in which the march was conducted. By eight o'clock in the morning (he says) the whole town of Middleton was on the alert. Even those who would not or could not go to Manchester came out to see their friends and relations start. The people, marching five abreast, were headed by twelve young men, two deep, each holding in his hand a bunch of laurel, "as a token of amity and peace." Above the men who walked five abreast waved two silk flags, one blue and the other green, inscribed, in gilt letters, with the mottoes:

"Unity and Strength," "Liberty and Fraternity," 'Parliaments Annual," "Suffrage Universal."

And between these flags was carried, on a pole, a cap of liberty, of crimson velvet, and a branch of laurel. To every hundred men there was a leader, who wore a sprig of laurel in his hat; and over these captains there were

superior officers, also decorated. Bamford, the -

leader of the whole, walked at the head of his column of three thousand, with a bugler by his side to sound tie orders for advancing, halting, and retiring. Before setting forth, Bamford formed the Widdleton men into a hollow square, and addressed them in his own forcible, sensible manner. He expressed a hope that their conduct would that day be marked by the steadiness and seriousness befitting so important an occasion. He requested them to offer no insult or provocation to any by word or deed, nor to retaliate in any way, lest even the smallest disturbance might serve as a pretext for dispersing the meeting. If the peace-officers came to arrest himself or any other person, they were to be peaceable and not to offer any resistance. He astly told them that, in conformity with a rule laid down by the committee, xo sticks nor weapons were to be carried in the ranks, and those who had them were requested to leave them behind. This was accordingly done, and only the old and infirm retained their walking-sticks. Bamford, always a truthful and careful observer, says his men were most decently though humbly attired. There was not one who did not exhibit a white Sunday's shirt, a neckcloth, or other apparel, in clean though homely condition. Having cheered their leader, the Middleton men resumed their marching order; the music struck up gaily; and the column move forward. About three thousand Rochdale a soon joined them. A oa of hunred young married women preceded the column,

oand as many girls danced to the music or sang snatches of songs. Some children also went with them, and several hundred stragglers walked by their side. The column increased in number at every hamlet it passed through.

At Newtown, the partner of a firm for which Bamford had lately worked came up, took bim by the hand, and said, kindly though earnestly, that he hoped no harm was iutended by all those people that were coming in; Bamford replied that he would pledge his life for their perfect peaceableness.

"Look at them," said Bamford. 'Do they look like persons wishing to outrage the law ? They are heads of decent working families. No, no, my dear sir and respected master, if any wrong or violence takes place, it will be committed by men of a different stamp from these."

The master replied he was glad to hear it, and was happy he had seen Bamford; and, in reply to Bamford's inquiry, he said he "did not believe they would be interrupted at the meeting."

"Then," said Bamford, "all will be well," and shook hands with his master and left him. As they entered Manchester, Bamford heard that Dr. Healey, a quack doctor, had led the Lees and Saddleworth union, following a coalblack flag, inscribed, in ghastly white Fi

"Equal Representation or Death;" and above this, "Love" — with a heart and two hands joined.

Even at that thoughtful moment, Bamford confesses he could not help smiling at the notion of his little friend heading a funeral procession of his own patients. The Middleton men reached St. Peter's Field about half-past eleven.

The Jacobite emblems were eminently unwise. The Tories of Manchester were already quite enough astounded at the form and precision of the marching, and at the great number of the visitors. A contemporary writer says, with almost ludicrous horror: "Half an hour ago I met in Oldham-street an immense mass of men, marching in common time, five abreast, with two white flags, and a very respectable band of music, consisting of not less than thirty performers. 1 counted these files until about two thousand men had passed, when the crowd became so great that [ could no longer pursue my reckoning, but I conceive that the whole party drawn up and marching in order could not be less than four or five thousand, Very shortly afterwards a party of about eight thousand passed the Exchange. These also were in military array, preceded by flags, red and black, with the cap of Jacobinism. 'The former of the two parties came from Bury, the latter from Royton. Similar parties came in from Stock_ and the other towns in the neighbourhood.

have just been at the 2 appointed for the meeting; about fifteen thousand persons are already there, men and women."

St. Peter's Field, then a large open space of two or three acres, is now nearly in the centre

of that great metropolis of industry, Manchester. The Free-Trade Hall stands on its site, and a theatre, a museum, and numerous palatial warehouses skirt the ground. In the centre of the space on this unlucky August day stood two carts with a sort of stage formed upon them. Around the carts were planted five banners, two red, two white, an one black. Upon one side of the latter was a hand holding the scales of justice, with the inscription, "Taxation without Representation is Unjust and Tyrannical." On the other side was at the top "Love ;" beneath, ' Unite and be Free," "Equal Representation or Death." On some of the other flags were, "No Corn Laws," "Let's Die like Men, and not be Sold like Slaves."

That heavy sullen oppression of dread suspense and alarm that precedes a thunderstorm hung over Manchester. The shop-windows in olubaken Market-street, and the body of the town, were closed, and from an early hour in the forenoon all business was suspended—not from a dread of the harmless reformers, but from fear of some violence being used against them. In the principal streets an immense number of country people were strolling about. The more settled parts of the town were silent as death. The scene, says an eyewitness, excite' :u impression at once melancholy and awful. The wildest rumours were current. lt was said that Hunt was to be arrested on the hustings, and it was known that the Manchester and Salford yeomanry cavalry, one hundred and forty in number y the all master manufacturers), were concealed in Messrs. Pickford's yard. Capital had grown cruel in its angry alarm. About two hundred special constables had been sworn in. The

heshire yeomanry, nearly four hundred strong, and the 1st Dragoon Guards, were near the city. The magistrates could also rely promptly on six troops of the 15th Hussars, nearly the whole of the 3lst and 88th Foot, and two companies of Horse Artillery. They could not help being afraid, property is always timid; but, with such an overwhelming force, they need scarcely have been cruel, for there were soldiers enough to have swept the streets and to have sacked the city. We all know what a single file of grenadiers can do against even an armed and infuriated rabble. Witness those terrible Lord George Gordon riots; witness the Bristol riots. Remember the French in Madrid; remember even that savage outbreak of the Reds, when Cavaignac mowed. them down in heaps. What riot has there been in England since Jack Cade struck London Stone with his dripping sword, that twenty dragoons could not 1ave trampled down, right or wrong?

The special constables and the local yeomanry the magistrates held in their own leash. The soldiers were under the command of Colonel Guy L'Estrange, of the 31st Regiment, who was senior officer in the absence of Sir John Byng (afterwards Earl of Strafford), the general of the district, who was then at Pontefract, and to whom no intimation of the intended movements

had been sent. Early on the forenoon of the

16th, half the constables, whose presence was by no means necessary except to irritate the people and move the more desperate to some overt act, were posted close to the hustings, in the centre of St. Peter's Field; the rest in a line of communication with a private house on the south side of the irregular square space, to which the mischievous magistrates had repaired about eleven o'clock from the Star Inn, where they had at first assembled. This house was about three hundred yards from the hustings. A committee of fevered county magistrates had been constantly sitting since the Saturday morning taking depositions, listening to petitions and remonstrances against the meeting, and trying to settle what to do in the imaginary crisis, which existed only in their own fears. It was at last decided, after much flurried talking, not to attempt to prevent the meeting, but to arrest Hunt and the other leaders publicly and ignominiously when the speaking had commenced. The troops were to wait till it was seen how the

. meeting went on, and what might arise. In the

mean time, two squadrons (three hundred and forty men) of the 15th Hussars having been marched into the town from the barracks in the suburbs about ten o'clock, were dismounted in a wide street a quarter of a mile to the north of St. Peter's Field. The Cheshire yeomany were formed to the left of the same street. e rest of the hussars were with the artillery between the cavalry barracks and the town. The Manchester yeomanry, quite ready for work, ey stationed in a street to the east of the eld.

The infantry were also in readiness. An eyewitness, writing from Manchester before the meeting, said :

"In short, here is military force enough to crush ten such mobs." If large armies are unmanageable, how still more helpless is a vast unarmed crowd!

A little before one, an unknown man began to address the (nearly) eighty thousand peaceable artisans and country people now assembled in the field. The faces turned expectantly towards the hustings and the banners. The man spoke calmly enough. He said: "If we are mad, as our enemies call us, it is the most pleasant loss of senses I ever experienced, and 1 hope it will never be extinct but with death. At this important crisis it behoves every free-born Englishman to abstain from violence. We only desire our fair and just rights; let us demand them with steadiness and perseverance, and victory will be the certain result."

A few minutes to one o'clock a rolling shout proclaimed the arrival of the great demagogue, and eighty thousand voices shouted welcome to the vain and empty man they delighted to honour. There he was, a handsome broadshouldered man, with the restless face. He wore, as usual, his theatrical country squire dress, blue coat and brass buttons, topboots, and impudent white hat, then the badge of the radical party. He was preceded by a

ALL THE YEAR ROUND.

[Conducted by noisy band of music and by flags, while above the crowd rose a board, inscribed "Order." It was said that Wooler, the dreaded and hideous editor of the Black Dwarf paper, was with him ; this was not true. There sat in the carriage his allies, Johnson, Moorhouse, Seaton, and Swift. Hunt stood up in the barouche, eyeing the enormous multitude with astonishment and satisfaction. On the box sat an Amazon named Mary Waterworth, bearing the standard of the Stockport Female Reformers, and waving a white handkerchief. She had just been lifted into the carriage, probably out of compassion, as it passed through the crowd.

Hunt's band struck up Rule Britannia and God save the King; the people generally took their hats off. As soon as the orator mounted the hustings the music ceased. It was proposed that Mr. Hunt should take the chair; the motion was seconded and carried by acclamation. The orator, removing his white hat, advanced to the front of the hustings and addressed the great hushed multitude.

" Gentlemen," he said, "I crave your indulgence while I proceed to state the nature and object of this meeting, and [ particularly request that no gentleman will call silence, as it produces more disorder than any other circumstance, and perhaps will give our enemies the opportunity of causing a further encroachment on our rights and liberties. Gentlemen, for the honour you have done me in electing me chairman on this important occasion I return you my sincere and heartfelt thanks. I am happy to see such an immense concourse of people assembled, and I fearfully regret that I shall not be able to make myself heard by all of you, but those who are able to hear me will, I hope, do so peaceably and quietly. It is useless to attempt to relate the proceedings that have occurred in your town during the last ten days, or to state te you the cause of the meeting on Monday being postponed; you are all acquainted with it. Those wise magistrates, who were the cause of preventing the meeting on Monday last, fancied they had achieved a = victory; but their pusillanimous con-

uct since, and the presence of such an immense and respectable assembly as now stands before me, prove the contrary. A placard which nobody could understand had been posted up all over the town, signed by Zom Long and Jack Short, and some such contemptible beings. If any one is riotous, put him down, and keep him down." He was about to proceed, when the appearance of cavalry in the distance stopped him for the moment.

In the mean time, Nodin, the chief constable, had informed Mr. Hulton, the chairman of the bench of magistrates, that he could not execute the warrant for the arrest of Hunt and his colleagues without military aid. Mr. Hulton imstantly wrote to 'the éommander of the Manchester yeomanry, and to Colonel L'Estrange, to bring up the regular troops to the house where the magistrates were.

The yeomanry came first, being nearest. Their =

blue and white uniforms were almost instantly seen as the troopers galloped down Moselystreet and Peter-street, and ranged themselves, sword in hand, in front of the "Cottage," a well-known building on the south side of Peter's Field, near where the magistrates were at the windows. Hunt, seeing the yeomen, to save the people breaking on that side nearest the horses, cried out that it was only some trick to frighten the meeting, and called to the people round the hustings to stand firm, and give three cheers of good will. The yeomanry remained under the wall about five minutes, during which time, it is said, the Riot Act was read. They then waved their swords and dashed at once into the crowd. They were soon brought to a stand : the crowd was dense, and now held firm. The yeom ranks were broken, the troopers separated, got wedged in the mob, powerless alike to retire or advance. There was no great harm in this dilemma ; there they could have remained till the meeting was over, and as the crowd dispersed have arrested the speakers. No overt act had been committed; no yeoman was pulled from his horse, struck, or pelted.

At this moment—so immediately that the closest. observers describe it as simultaneously —two squadrons of hussars cantered up round the west side of the field. They had only been a quarter of a mile off. Mr. Hulton sees the Manchester yeomanry, his own friends, as he thinks, in danger. Colonel L'Estrange asks him what he is to do. The magistrate, in an agony of frenzied, but quite irrational alarm, cries :

" Good God, sir, do you not see how they are attacking the yeomanry? Disperse the crowd."

Fatal and foolish werds! The officer is a mere agent of the civil power; it is not for him to reflect or decide. The men look along the line waiting for his cry. He shouts, "Forward !" the trumpet sounds, and the three hundred and seventy men dash down on the eighty thousand close-packed and harmless people. Mr. Hulton (imbecile !) leaves the window, "because he would rather not see any advance of the military." We all remember the fool in the Proverbs, who flung about firebrands and called it sport. The charge swept the people down in heaps. Yeomen and constables were trampled back by their too zealous friends; men, women, and children were piled in struggling masses, An eye-witness says :

"The troops instantly dashed off at full gallop amongst the people, actually hacking their way up to the hustings. A cordon of special constables was drawn from the house occupied by the magistrates towards the stage, and fared as ill from the attacks of the soldiers as the pane at ap A comparatively undisciplined body, led on by officers who had never had any experience in military affairs, and probably all under the influence both of personal fear and considerable political feelings of hostility, could not be expected to act either with coolness or discrimination; and, accordingly, men, women, and children, constables and reformers, were ail

equally exposed to their attacks ; numbers were trampled down, and numbers were cut down. When they arrived at the hustings, sixteen banners and a cap of liberty were torn or cut from the hands of those who held them, and Hunt, Johnston, and Seaton, with several other persons, including three or four women, were taken into custody. Hunt was hurried along by the constables to the house where the magistrates were sitting, crying out ' Murder!' as he was every instant struck by the bludgeons of numbers of constables who surrounded him. An attempt was made to knock his hat off, but unsuccessfully ; and just as he was going up the a a person struck him on the head with both sts."

But the dreadful scene of slaughter and uncalled-for cruelty had eye-witnesses of a far more observant and thoughtful description than the one whose letter we have just quoted. Bamford, a man honest and true to the core, watched it all with a beating heart and with burning eyes.

When he first saw the troops launched at the unoffending people, he called out to those near him—he, perhaps, scarcely knew why—" They are riding upon us; stand fast." The ery rang through the ranks of the Middleton men. "Stand fast!" The cavalry got confused. "They evidently," he says, "could not, with all the weight of man horse, penetrate that compact mass of human beings; and their sabres were plied to hew a way through naked held hands and defenceless heads; and then choppe limbs and wound-gaping skulls were seen; and groans and cries were mingled with the din of that horrid confusion. 'Ah! ah! 'For shame! for shame!' was shouted. Then 'Break! break! They are killing them in front, and they cannot get away;' and there was a general cry of ' Break! break!' Fora moment the crowd held back as in a pause; then was a rush, heavy and resistless as a headlong sea, and a sound like low thunder, with screams, prayers, and imprecations from the crowd, moiled and ~~ doomed, who could not escape... . . In ten minutes from the commencement of the havoc, the field was an open and almost deserted space. The sun looked down through a sultry and motionless air..... The hustings remained, with a few broken and hewed flag-staves erect, and a torn and gashed banner or two dropping; whilst over the whole field were strewed caps, bonnets, hats, shawls, and shoes, and other parts of male and female dress, trampled, torn, and bloody. .... Several mounds of human beings still remained where they had fallen, crushed down and smothered. Some of these still groaning, others with staring eyes, were gasping for breath ; and others would never breathe more. All was silent save those low sounds, and the occasional snorting and pawing of steeds. Persons might sometimes be noticed peeping from attics and over the tall ridgings of houses, but they quickly withdrew, as if fearful of being observed, or unable to sustain the full gaze of a scene so hideous and abhorrent

omen and the groans of men were to be heard at some distance. Every person who attended out of curiosity immediately fled. The crush was so great in one part of the field that it knocked down some outbuildings at the end of a row of houses, on which there were at least twenty or thirty persons, with an immense crash. As I was carried along by the crowd, I saw several almost buried in the ruins. Others, in their anxiety to escape, had fallen down, and had been trampled on by the populace." 'The frightened people, helpless as scared sheep, were pursued at full gallop by the sabrers through all the avenues leading to St. Peter's Field; and even the distant parts of the town rang with the echoes of the boots of the pursuers' horses. It was a cruel and brutal carnage.

That night the infirmary was crowded with wounded and dying persons, gashed, trampled, crushed, and bruised, their limbs fractured by sabre blows or by the feet of the hussar horses. Five or six were dead; thirty dangerously wounded ; forty much injured. A special constable, Mr. Ashworth, landlord of the Bull's Head, was killed; one of the Manchester

eomen was beaten off his horse by a brickbat, and had his skull fractured. No soldier appears to have been even bruised, and only this one pe who, some said, was really injured by a all from his horse. About thirty of the unfortunate wounded persons had been slashed with sabres on the heads, hands, and shoulders.

That night, even though roused by this cruelty, the Manchester people broke out into

no considerable riot. At half-past four the mob again assembled at St. Peter's Church, and was soon dispersed. They then gathered at New Cross, a place inhabited by the lower Irish, and broke open a shop. 'The military fired, killed one man, and dangerously wounded several others. The soldiers paraded the streets all that night. All the roads leading from that town to Middleton, Leigh, Royton, presented a distressing spectacle of men, women, and children, all hurrying homeward in the greatest. disorder, some with their clothes torn, others lamed by the wounds they had received in the affray. On Tuesday morning several hundreds of persons were seen within fourteen miles of Manchester still lying in the fields by the roadside, overcome with fatigue, or unable, from the injuries they had received, to reach their homes.

Hunt and his friends were brought up before the magistrates on the Friday following, but were remanded till that day week, by which time Bamford, Moorhouse, and others were arrested. They were then again brought up, and informed that government had, for the present, abandoned the charge of high treason, and that they would be only detained till they should find bail to be tried for the misdemeanour of having conspired to alter the law by force and threats.

The Tories tried very hard to appear still alarmed.

The grand jury of the county of

Lancaster threw out all the bills against individual Manchester yeomen for cutting and maiming. An inquest sat at Oldham for nine days on one of the sufferers, but the proceedings at last grew confused and irregular, and were quashed by the Court of King's Bench. The more violent Tories even affected great satisfaction at "the decisive and effective measures to preserve public tranquillity" taken by the Manchester magistrates. These were Lord Sidmouth's own words in his letters to the lord lieutenants of Lancashire and Cheshire. The attorney- and solicitor-general thought the conduct completely justified. Lord Eldon was blandly delighted. He pronounced the meeting an overt act of treason, as "numbers constituted force, force terror, and terror ille—, He pressed very hard to arraign Hunt or high treason, but was overruled. The orator was eventually sent to Ilchester jail for two years and a half. Sympathisers with the sufferers were sharply rebuked. The Regent himself majestically reproved the common council of London for their address to him upon the subject. Westminster, Norwich, York, Bristol, Liverpool, and Nottingham, undaunted by this awful reproof, sent in addresses, however, condemning the magistrates and the weak but coercive government. For attending a meeting at York of twenty thousand persons, and signing a requisition to the high sheriff, Earl Fitzwilliam was deprived of the office of lord-lieutenant of the West Riding. Sir Francis Burdett, for fervently protesting, was proceeded against for libel. The Duke of Hamilton, lord-lieutenant of the county of Lanark, nevertheless sent fifty pounds for the relief of the Manchester sufferers. Many of the Tories loudly insisted that the magistrates had acted rightly, and talked of "the necessary ardour" of the troops. Lord Redesdale even stupidly contended that all reform meetings were overt acts of treasonable conspiracy. Lord Eldon cried aloud for more stringent acts of parliament, as there was "nothing to be done now" but to let the meetings take place, and reading the Riot Act if there was a riot at any of them. That warm-hearted and wise father (or rather stepfather) of his people, the Regent, was also charmed with the Manchester magistrates. He expressed his ' approbation and high commendation of the conduct of the magistrates and civil authorities at Manchester, as well as the officers and troops, both regular and yeomanry cavalry, whose firmness and effectual support of the civil power preserved the peace of the town on that most critical occasion." Calmly, it must be allowed that the magistrates had done nothing illegal. But the wicked folly was to send forty yeomen to break through from fifty to eighty thousand people; the cruelty was, before even a stone was thrown, to proclaim the meeting a riot, and to launch soldiers on a helpless mob, packed together too close to be dangerous, even if it had shown the slightest wish to be so. The ground could have been occupied beforehand, the meeting prevented by turning back the

ee
country levies before they entered the town. The arrests should have been made before or after the meeting. The arrests once made, the meeting could no longer have been mischievous. Rage at their own blunders, mingled with

charge that ended in the death of at least six people, the wounding of some eighty others, and innumerable secret casualties that never came to light. The overt act was clearly

pretence for the cruelty shown. That same year the tyrannical Six Acts were assed by that timid but oppressive statesman,

facturing classes grew more determined and revengeful. days' riot at Paisley and Glasgow; in November there were rumours of a general rising ;

racy was organised. ' In bitter parody of the name of Wellington's

the inoffensive Manchester workmen was christened by the name of Peterloo.
