

https://archive.org/details/sim_all-the-year-round_1867-11-23_18_448/page/518/mode/2up?q=%22old+stories+re-told%22

All the Year Round  1867-11-23: Vol 18 Iss 448

pp. 519-525

OLD STORIES RE-TOLD. MUTINIES IN THE NAVY.

The year after Lord Bridport's victory over the French, great and just discontent prevailed among the sailors of our fleet. Lord-Chathan? seems to have been a blundering First Lord, and his successor, Lord Spencer, a mischievous one.

As early as 1794, the seamen had had many grievous causes of complaint. They were treated rather as oxen pe ‘up for the butcher than as human beings, Wi ts to feel, and brains to resent, injustice.- That terrible old Tartar, Lord St. Vincent, had once kept our fleet at sea, blockading Brest, for one hundred and three days. Long after this, Nelson watched off Toulon tor thirty months, only going on shore, in that period, three times—an hour each time. These tedious blockades, so ruinous to ships and so exhausting to sailors, who, perhaps, half the time, had scanty provisions and insufficient sleep, were strongly disapproved of by Lord Howe, and afterwards by Lord Nelson.

Another cause of complaint in the navy was the capricious and purposeless transfer of crews from one vessel to another. Lord Nel-

letter out of the breast of his sheepskin ; but he

son, ata later date, protested strongly against

this heartless and irrational practice, which kept captains and their men always strangers, and prevented the seamen getting attached to a special ship in that filial, and almost superstitious way, so truthfully shown by our best naval novelist, Marryat, whose books were written in the very midst of the life he described.

A third great grievance was that many of the older vessels were not thoroughly seaworthy. Sailors are wild, reckless fellows ; but they will not put out to sea in coffins. Lord Melville afterwards confessed that when he came to the helm, he found a fleet of worn-out ships, that required doubling, crossbracing, and patching up to prepare them for the rough pummelling at Trafalgar. It was also found necessary to reinforce our = squadrons by "donkey frigates," and by those attenuated cheap seventy-fours that the sailors called the "Forty Thieves." It was partly to the weakness and incapability of an enemy that disregarded its navy, that we were indebted for our victories at sea.

Another intolerable grievance among sailors was the cruel and despotic system of impressment. Merchant seamen coming home sick and weary from long cruises on the coast of Africa and dangerous coasting voyages in the West Indies, were seized in the Channel, at the Nore, or at St. Helen's, dragged into tenders, and hurried off, without seeing home or friends, for five or six years more of compulsory misery and privation. Slavery itself could not boast a more iniquitous form of tyranny and oppression. The ringleaders of mutineers, it was observed, had generally been impressed men.

As for the cruel yet almost ludicrous injustice in the distribution of naval prize money we need say little, as the complaint still continues both in the army and the navy, and it frequently happens that the War Office and the Admiralty delay such days of settlement until death lessens the number of recipients.

Sailors are not reflective men, but even they could see through the hard-heartedness, injustice, and stupidity of the Board of Admiralty. In 1783, just after Lord Howe took the place of Keppell as First Lord, a mutiny broke out in the ships at Portsmouth, Plymouth, aud Sheerness The crews had been told that they were to be sent tothe West Indies—even the crews of the vessels just returned from those detested and dangerous ports. The Janus (44) headed the outbreak, the men keeping their officers under hatches, and refusing to let the captain, who had gone on shore, return on board. The captain at last, finding an opportunity to return, harangued the men, and confessed that the ship was to be kept in commission, and was destined for the American station. The men grew stark mad at this; would hear no more, and rushed down to their quarters with lighted matches, prepared to fire on any boats that approached hon. The port admiral instantly wrote to Lord Howe, who came down at once from London boldly and alone. The side of the Janus was manned by the mutineers, and the side ropes put over with all

honours and with the greatest respect. Lord Howe then desired all hands to be called, and harangued them reproachfully on the quarterdeck. He assured them he was always ready to listen to any complaints, and he promised them that the Janus should be at once paid off, contrary to the intention of his predecessor. The men gave three cheers. The " sailors' friend " had crushed the mutiny by an act of kindness, kindly done.

A few months after this, a mutiny also broke out in the Raisonnable (Captain Lord Harvey), just returned from the Leeward Islands. The ship was ordered to Chatham, to be paid off. The men, tired of work, declared they would not go round, but would have their money at once in Portsmouth harbour. They had already begun to unmoor the ship, when Lord Harvey ordered twelve of the ringleaders to be seized and put into irons. The mutiny then ceased. At the court-martial, seven sailors were sentenced to death, three were sentenced to three hundred lashes, and two were acquitted. Three only, however, eventually suffered, and, at Lord Harvey's intercession, the punishment of the rest was remitted.

Lord Howe at this time was very discontented with the state of our navy. He found his flag-ship, the Victory, "filthy," and the discipline so bad, that he confessed he did not think it safe for a man to trust himself with such a fleet. In 1794, there was a very serious outbreak on board the Culloden. ‘The men were afraid of the vessel, and wanted it docked and examined. A letter, stating their grievances, and signed "A Delegate," was written to Lord Bridport, then second in command. Captain Trowbridge, however, applied for a court-martial on ten of the ringleaders, of whom two were acquitted, and eight sentenced to be hanged.

But it was in the year 1797—a year memorable for the gallant actions of Sir John Jervis off Cape St. Vincent, and Admiral Duncan off the Texel, that the worst mutinies broke out. Seventy-nine naval courts-martial are recorded in that year alone.

As early as March, 1797, petitions were sent to Lord Howe, then at Bath for the benefit of the waters, begging him to solicit the Admiralty to raise the sailors' pay, as had been lately done to the army and militia, and also to make some provision for their wives and families. Lord Howe, Lord Bridport, and Sir Peter Parker, the port admiral, thinking all these petitions to be the work of merely one factious person, cast them into the official waste-paper basket. In April, however, it was discovered that the various crews were in correspondence, and there was a plan to seize the vessels and turn out the officers. On the 15th of April, Admiral Bridport, being telegraphed from the Admiralty, signalled the fleet to prepare for sea. Instead of weighing anchor, the men of the Queen Charlotte instantly mounted the rigging, and gave three cheers. These cheers were answered from every ship. The next day, two delegates were chosen by each ship, and Lord Howe's cabin appointed for their conferences. On the 17th, every seaman in the fleet, even including the admiral's body-servants, was sworn to support the cause. They reeved ropes from the yard-arms, as a  warning and terror to all traitors, and they sent onshore all objectionable officers. Military honours were paid to the delegates. Corporal punishment was inflicted on drunkards, and more than usually strict discipline preserved. Frigates with convoys were allowed to sail.  The Board of Admiralty came down to Portsmouth on the 17th, and finding the sailors' demands reasonable, agreed to advance their pay, four shillings a month to the able, three shillings to the ordinary, and two shillings to landsmen. The men refused to give an immediate consent, which so exasperated Admiral Gardner, a choleric man, that he shook one delegate by the collar, and swore he would have every fifth man in the fleet hanged. This so maddened the mutineers, that it was with difficulty the admiral escaped from the ship with his life. Lord Bridport's flag was then struck, in spite of the entreaties of many of the officers, a red flag hoisted, every gun in the fleet loaded, and matches kept ready lighted. On the 23rd, Lord Bridport, whom the sailors called "their father and friend," returned to his ship, and rehoisted his flag; but the mutineers still refused to lift an anchor till the king had granted them a pardon under his sign manual; also  

Until the rise in their pay was sanctioned by act of parliament;

Until the supply of vegetables was increased;

Until the grievances of private ships were redressed. The mutineers also demanded more leave on shore, more attention to the sick on board ship, and that pay should be continued to men wounded in action, until they were either cured or discharged. They moreover demanded that the marines' pay should be increased, that the pensions at Greenwich Hospital should be raised to ten pounds per annum, also that the daily |bread and meat should be augmented to sixteen ounces; and they expressed a wish that the East India Company's fleet should share in these reforms. On these demands being acceded to, and the king's pardon being given, the fleet returned to  its duty, and some of the vessels sailed at once for St. Helen's. An unwise delay in passing the act of parliament, and an injudicious order from the Admiralty to captains to keep the marines' arms in good order, and to repress disturbances, alarmed the naturally suspicious sailors, and on the 7th of May fresh mutinies broke out at St. Helen's and at Spithead, and delegates were again appointed. Admiral Colpoys refusing to allow  the delegates on board the London, and ordering his men below, one man began to unlash a foremost gun, threatening to point it aft and sweep the quarter-deck. A lieutenant, having warned this man, on his persistence, fired and shot him dead. The dead man's comrades, joined by the marines, instantly rushed to arms, disarmed the officers, proposed to hang the lieutenant, and even to kill the admiral. But, by the generous courage of the admiral, who took the blame entirely upon himself, and by the fervent intercession of the chaplain and the surgeon, the offender's life was spared.

It was a curious trait of sailors' character, in the midst of all this violence, that the men threatened to throw overboard a mutineer, for calling the admiral "a bloody rascal."

One of the ships' companies talking openly of carrying their vessel into a French harbour, the delegates threatened them with instant destruction if the language was repeated; and, believing that they were infected by revolutionary agents from the shore, kept guard, boats rowing round the treasonable vessel night and day.

The objectionable officers being again sent on land, Lord Howe, though old, infirm, and gouty, was requested by the king to visit the fleet, and try conciliatory measures. On the 11th of May, the brave old sailor visited the line of battle ships, and received the delegates on board the Royal William. He insisted, however, that, before a pardon by royal proclamation was issued, they should express contrition. This they did, but declared they would never receive again the officers sent ashore. Lord Howe consented to this, much to the disgust of all martinets. By this agreement, one admiral, four captains, twenty-nine lieutenants, and twenty-five midshipmen were superseded.

But the fleet at the Nore remained still mutinous and dissatisfied. The seamen of the Sandwich even went so far as to fire on the San Fiorenza, which was passing by them on its way to Yarmouth roads to receive the Prince of Würtemberg and his bride. Then the Admiralty Board went down to Sheerness, and there was an attempt at a rising on board Lord Duncan's vessel, the Venerable. Towards the end of the month, when the admirai ordered the fleet to weigh and proceed from Yarmouth to the Texel, two of the squadron refused, on pretence of being in course of payment; and the next day the whole North Sea fleet deserted, and joined Parker and other mutineers at the Nore. A few ships, however, at Portsmouth, refused to help Parker, and expressed themselves satisfied with the concessions already made. On the 6th of June, the Serapis made her escape from the rebels, but was fired at and damaged by the mutineers' shot ; and the Clyde  was also injured on the 7th of June. On the 15th of June, the mutineers quarrelled, and several vessels left the fleet. The departure of the Nassau was, however, prevented, and the Repulse, running aground, was fired into, and several men killed. Parker himself, not satisfied with nine-pound shot, fired a crowbar from one of the guns. The Ardent, passing in the dark, fired at the Monmouth, and killed and wounded several of her crew.

Soon after this the mutineers broke up in despair. The red flags were struck, and traders allowed to pass up the Thames. That same night, many of the vessels sailed in under the guns of Sheerness, with a flag of truce flying, and Parker, in the Sandwich, soon after surrendered, and the ship was placed between the guns of the fort and the Ardent. The admiral's coxswain and a picket of the West York Militia then arrested aban and brought him on shore, with his hands bound, to a dark cell under the garrison chapel. The next day he was sent to Maidstone jail. He appeared calm, collected, and rather cheerful. Parker and his confederates were tried on the 22nd of June. He and twenty-two of his companions were sentenced to be hanged on board the Sandwich.

In 1801, the mutiny of the Temeraire and several other vessels of the Bantry Bay squadron, excited great alarm in the ministry. The discontent came to a head on the 6th of December, 1801, when a report ran through the fleet that some of the vessels were to be sent to the West Indies. The mutineers' plan was to break open the gunner's store and get possession of the tomahawks. When the admiral came on board, and orders were given to unmoor the ship, the disaffected were to rush aft, barricade the hatchways with the hammocks, disarm the sentinels, and seize the arms. The ringleaders had told them that all the marines were gained over except a few "gulpins"—new recruits. The mutineers had secretly loaded several of the guns to fire on the officers, and kept matches lighted for the purpose. They had also rockets with which to signal the other ships. One of them openly boasted that the officers could not kill more than fifty or sixty of the foremost men before they were

themselves overpowered, aud the powder magazine taken possession of. The subsequent trial proved that the conspiracy had been long projecting. The ringleaders met in the cabin of a sailor named Mayfield, where they put down their plans in writing. Their confederates sat down with affected carelessness outside the berths, keeping watch, and if the lieutenant, or any suspected officer, came by, the signal of alarm was to sing out, "A rat, catch the rat!" or to throw the hats down on the deck, and ask for a chew of tobacco. The ringleaders, hearing this, would come out and sit down on the cables.

The open mutiny broke out on the 6th of December, about "two bells after dinner." The word was passed round for no mutineer to drink more than his allowance. The cry was then raised for all hands to go forward, and a ringleader instantly shouted, "Lower the ports!" The ports were then lowered, and there' was a shout raised of—

"Wad and shot; no place but England."

The men then cheered, and hauled in all the scuttles. One of the delegates of the rioters, a man named Fitzgerald, when he heard the cheering, said exultingly:

"Now the sun shines on us all at last."

Lieutenant Douglas instantly came to ask what the cheering meant, and invited those who had complaints to come on the quarter-deck and address the admiral; but the men, not wishing to single themselves out in that way for future punishment, cried, "No, no! Send down the master of the ship; we don't want to shiver on the quarter-deck. Only the master shall come down."

Lieutenant Douglas then coming down the ladder, several of the men tried to unship it, and there were cries of—

"Break his neck and kill him." ‘Shoot, shoot! Bring the match! Strike the rascal with a shot!"

The "True Britons," as these dangerous mer. called themselves, had before this agreed to cool the officers' tempers, either with shot used as missiles, or with a discharge of cannon. They then went on the quarter-deck in a turbulent crowd, and said they wished to know where they were going to? They had many of them been eight or nine years in service, and now war was over they wanted to go on shore and see their friends. The admiral replied it was no use to he obstreperous—he must obey orders ; and when he called all hands, he hoped they would go with good will. The men, however, still kept shouting:

"No, no! We will not go from the land; we will go to England."

On the Sunday, the mutineers grew louder in their threats. The ringleaders proposed to take a man they suspected, tie him iu a bread bag, and throw him overboard; the marines were to be stabbed or smothered in their berths ; the officers killed ; and, if defeated, the rioters were to blow upthe ship. ‘They also reported that the crews of the Formidable, Majestic, and Vengeance, were with them; and the cry was, " We will go through with it.' The next day they struck a lieutenant who had been complaining of their ‘‘ cobbing," without orders, men who got drunk. They tlien rushed aft to rescue a drunken marine who had been put in irons, and the shout was to "clear those gentlemen quality" off the forecastle, and either kill them or send them away. The next day all the ringleaders were seized, the admiral himself examining the faces of the men on deck by the light of a lantern he carried round. Sixteen of the mutineers were tried on January 6, 1802, on board the Gladiator, in Portsmouth harbour. One of them had volunteered at Toulon and at Convention Hill, and others had fought bravely in several of Earl St. Vincent's battles. The court found fifteen of the men guilty, and sentenced one man to receive two hundred lashes. All of them solemnly disclaimed any intention of committing murder. Only six of the men (Mayfieid, Collins, Fitzgerald, Chesterman, Ward, and Hillier) were executed: four on board the Temeraire, one died on board the Majestic, and the last on board the Formidable.

It was this same vessel, Tur Orp TEMERAIRE, the hero of many battles, that Turner painted, by Stanfield's advice, being towed to lier last moorings near Greenwich.

No serious outbreak has taken place in our navy since the mutiny of 1801. Much as such outbreaks are to be regretted, it is quite certain that they have generally been occasioned by abuses and acts of injustice to a brave and patriotic race of men, and it is equally provable

that they have in the end often led to a speedy reform of those abuses and those acts of injustice.

