
https://archive.org/details/sim_all-the-year-round_1867-08-17_18_434?q=%22old+stories+re-told%22
All the Year Round  1867-08-17: Vol 18 Iss 434
Publication date 1867-08-17

pp. 179-86

OLD STORIES RE-TOLD. COLONEL DESPARD'S PLOT.

In 1779, Count d'Estaing threatened Jamaica with twenty-five sail and five-and-twenty thousand men. The French expedition proving a mere menace and ending in vapour, Governor Dalling, immediately on the disappearance of the hostile fleet below the horizon, planned an expedition against the Spanish colony of St. Juan, hoping to conquer Lake Nicaragua and the cities of Granada and Leon, and to cut off the communication of the Spaniards between their northern and southern American possessions. Lord George Germaine, secretary of state for the American department, approved the plan, more especially as great discontent against Spain was then prevailing in Peru. Nelson, a mere boy of acaptain, just posted on board the Hinchinbrooke (twenty-eight guns), was ordered to convoy the five hundred men destined for this dangerous expedition from Port Royal to Cape Gracios a Dios, in Honduras.

Governor Dalling and his officers were entirely ignorant of the climate of Nicaragua, its dangers, and its geography. The fatal expedition began by starting too late in the season. All went well at first; the native tribes of the Mosquito shore came to the camp and promised boats for the St. Juan river. On reaching the mouth of the St. Juan, Nelson's services properly ceased, but finding none of the soldiers had ever been up the river, or knew any of the distances, he resolved to take them up himself and let his sailors help the Indians. Nelson, at this time, is described as a gaunt, strange-looking young man, dressed in stiff-laced uniform, and an old-fashioned waistcoat with deep flaps, his lank unpowdered hair being tied in a stiff Hessian tail of extraordinary length. With him and among the troops was Captain Despard, a handsome resolute Irish officer, with bold and fine features ; a determined, impetuous, and intrepid man, who, in spite of his mild expression, was Nelson's right hand. By day, the sailors and Indians had to drag the boats, under a fiery sun, over shoals and glaring sandbanks ; by night, to endure the pestilential miasma and the heavy and poisonous dews. At last they reached a fort upon an island and Nelson and Despard stormed it at the head of some seamen. Then they arrived at the castle of St..Juan, sixty-nine miles from the mouth of the river, and, like the river itself, walled in by almost impassable woods swarming with

nakes. Nelson was for instant assault, but the soldiers, once more on terra firma, grew bold and pedantic, and insisted on a regular siege, although the rains had set in, and fever was fast mowing down the men. The untoward

lace was taken only in time to turn it into a

ospital. For months our brave men bore the horrors of this place, till the few survivors were too weak even to bury the dead. Only three hundred and eighty men survived out of one thousand eight hundred. Eighty-seven of the Hinchinbrooke's crew took to their beds in one night, and of the whole crew only ten eventually survived. The men of the transports all died, and some of the ships, being left without sailors, sank in the harbour. Nelson never recovered the effects of this campaign, and returned to England the wreck of fis former self, ‘to be instantly sent out to the North Seas, as if the Admiralty, as he remarked, had actually resolved upon his death.

Edward Marcus Despard, the strenuous captain whom we have seen hauling at boats with Nelson over the burning white sand-banks of the detestable St. Juan river, and storming the fort at the head of the seamen of the Hinchinbrooke, was the cadet of an old and respectable family in Queen's County, and he had the warm heart and strong passions of his race. He was the youngest of six brothers, five of whom were in the army or the navy. He was born in 1750 or 1751, and in 1766 entered the army as an ensign in the 5th Regiment. He afterwards exchanged to the 79th, and rose by degrees from lieutenant to quartermaster, captain-lieutenant and captain. In all these posts he served with credit and distinction, and was noticed and rewarded by General Meadows and the Duke of Northumberland. For the last twenty years he had been detached from his own corps, and entrusted with offices peculiarly responsible, and requiring experience, courage, and sagacity. He was chief engineer in Nelson's —, and obtained great praise for his valour and endurance from his commander, Captain Polson. He was then employed to construct public works at Jamaica, and executed the task so well and so promptly that he received the thanks of the council and assembly of the island ; he was appointed by the governor commander-in-chief of the island of Rattan and its dependencies; and on the Spanish Main and on the Mosquito shore he took rank as lieutenantcolonel and field engineer. A man evidently of an organising and independent mind, he now orem distinguished himself by leading the inhabitants of Cape Gracias 4 Dios against the Spaniards, and retaking from the Dons the important settlement of Black River. For this useful service Despard again received the thanks of the governor, council, and assembly of Jamaica, and, what was more, of Kin George himself. In 1783 he was made colonel, and in 1784 first commissioner for settling the boundary lines of the South American territory ceded to Britain by Spain. Profoundly versed in Central American aifairs, and able to

handle the Mosquito Indians, Nicaraguans, and Spaniards with great tact, knowledge, and skill, Colonel Despard had fair reason to expect that he might some day become governor of Jamaica itself. He was soon appointed our Superintendent on the coast of Honduras, where the mahogany trade required watching, and he obtained many important commercial privileges for us from the crown of Spain. Factions, however, arose at Honduras, and Colonel Despard was accused by the opposition of various misdemeanours, probably rather the result of ima or pride than of any real criminality.

actions often send a colonial governor home in disgrace, if they can get rid of him in no other way.

The result, indeed, proved his entire innocence, for, after two years' importunity and miserable degradation in lobbies and antechambers (enough alone to craze anybody— how many madmen and suicides has it made ?), an official inquiry was instituted with the usual sluggish formality and fuss, and the result was, that Colonel Despard was at last told by the ministers that there was no charge against him worthy of further investigation, that his Majesty had thought fit to abolish the office of superintendent at Honduras, or that he would have been reinstated in his post, but he was assured, foi de ministre, that his great services were not forgotten, and should in due time meet their reward. The real fact, probably, was, that the American department had delayed the business till all about it was for-

otten; fresh men had arisen who had not

een cognisant of poor —— courage, energy, and good sense, on whose minds was left some Office tradition of somebody having done something wrong somewhere ; and as it _—_ have been Despard or some one of his officials, or some one else at Honduras whom nobody knew, they determined to shelve the importunate and troublesome colonel, whom no rebuff would drive from the Whitehall door. The Greeks always punished an unsuccessful general, and it has been generally a rule with English ministers to make a scapegoat of a blundering admiral, as Voltaire sardonically said of Byng, " pour encourager les autres." It is even now observed that the Admiralty never give another vessel to a captain who has lost a man-of-war. Carelessness or misfortune, drunkenness or excess of caution, all one, he is thrown to the lions of public opinion. It may be a wise practice, but it is desperately cruel. We all know what Nelson suffered from the Admiralty of his day; its mean subterfuges, its idleness, its injustice. Whea he returned from the West Indies, broken in health, and was kept from mere malice (because he had been exposing pe against government) five months at the Nore, and when his vessel was turned into'a slop and receiving ship, he spoke of "the ungrateful service," and said, as he stepped from the Boreas on to the shore of the Medway, "It is my firm and unalterable determination never again to set my foot on board a king's' ship."

He was always denouncing "the accursed

system". of turning crews over from ship to

ship, so that they could never become attached

to the vessel or their officers. He was con-

stantly battling against the dishonest delays of ay.

1801, there was great disaffection among the navy. When Admiral Mitchell's squadron was suddenly ordered from Bantry Bay to pursue the Brest fleet to the West Indies, the sailors mutinied; nor was the disaffection quelled until fourteen of the ringleaders swung from the yard-arm. The ideal liberty that the French had first attempted to hold up as a standard of the proper condition of man, so long the slave of bad kings and the beast of burden of brutal barons, was still producing discontent in men's minds wherever liberty was still im-

perfect. Secret political societies were busy in

England, in the barrack and the forecastle, the factory and the tavern, enrolling men who desired more freedom and an extension of political privileges. It was no longer possible to maintain the old boundaries, for the conditions had changed. The bulk of these agitators were honest and thoughtful foreseers of the future ; but there were among them a few soured and disappointed persons, like ill-used Colonel Despard, who were impatient for swifter changes, and were for breaking in the doors that refused to open. We must have suffered as they had, be-

fore we can sufficiently know their feelings, or

sufficiently pity their fate. Nature is slow, reasoned the cooler philosophers of their —_" 3 it took centuries before Egypt was formed by the alluvion of the Nile, or the coral island became Otaheiti. Yes, said the desperate men of progress, but nature works also through the lightning, the hurricane, the storm, the volcano, and the earthquake. Who shall say which works the better : the coral insect or the avalanche ? Gradually the neglected and injured soldier entered into the more dangerous and desperate schemes of the Reformers of 1801. His mind became absorbed by the one idea of his own wrongs and those of his country. He mixed with discontented men, who talked of nothing else. Persons of Despard's temperament soon persuade themselves that to avenge themselves is to avenge the wrongs of millions. The desperate conspirator always believes himself a martyr. Even infamous Fieschi thought himself a Curtius; and that broken card-sharper, Thistlewood, posed himself under the very noose, as a Mutius Scevola. Despard began to talk against the government in an unguarded way, at taverns, in the Park, and at meetings. He became conspicuous, and the Habeas Corpus being at that time suspended whenever there were fish in the river, he was soon snapped up, and lodged powerless, unheard, and without appeal, in Coldbath Fields, then a true Bastille, quite as dangerous to liberty as those black towers that once frowned over the Port St. Antoine. Despard went into Coldbath Fields a Louvet; he left it a Marat. His rancour turned to malignancy, his hatred to

frenzy. He was now not for agitation, but for assassination and revolt. He collected round him all the disaffected soldiers in town, and drew up a wild scheme to be instantly executed.

His two usual places of meeting were the Oakley Arms, Oakley-street, Lambeth, and the Flying Horse, Newington. On November 12, 1802, John Emblin, a watchmaker, was taken to the Queen's Arms, Vauxhall, by a soldier named Lander. The men present were members of one of the many societies which looked to Despard as their head. He was known to them to be a neglected and disgraced colonel, newly out of prison for high treason, and his rank, education, and desperate views rendered him perfectly fit for their purpose. The men then went on to the Flying Horse, in the Clapham-road, and there saw Despard, the leader, in disguise ; some conspirators named Broughton, Windsor, and Smith, were drinking with him in a private room, and speaking of the form used at the Tower in passing the keys. Colonel Despard said the country was ready; the attack was to be made in the country and London on the same day; the stage and the mail-coaches were to be stopped. Colonel Despard also said that the whole of the royal family must be secured, and that, if necessary, he would attack the king with his own hand. It was then agreed that the Bank should be seized and the Tower taken. Windsor said with one hundred men he would take the Tower himself. The colonel said the arms at the Bank—six hundred—had been rendered useless by taking some part off. Lander afterwards remarked it would be prudent to have a division march from the Tower to New-street, Bishopsgate-street, to secure the arms of the East India Company; to go from thence to the Artillery Ground, where they would get more arms, and. secure the pieces of artillery; then to march forward and assist at the attack upon St. James's. The colonel, on another day, objected to Lander's plan, but spoke of taking the Bank and Tower, and destroying the telegraph ; he also thought that St. Paul's would be a good place for a garrison. It was resolved to raise companies of ten men, with an eleventh to take the command as captain. The oldest captain of five companies was to take the command of these fifty men, and was to be called colonel of that sub-division. There were divisions ready in the Borough, Blackwall, Marylebone, Spitalfields, and Whitechapel. This being settled, Colonel Despard said: "A regular organisation was necessary; people were everywhere ripe, ape peg! in Leeds, Sheffield, Birmingham, and all the large towns." The attack was to be made when his Majesty went to the Parliament House. " His Majesty must be put to death. I have weighed the matter well, and my heart is callous."

There were cards printed with a form of oath, and these were read over and kissed by all new proselytes, who then took copies to distribute. Lhe following was the oath:

CONSTITUTION

dence of Great Britain and Ireland. An equalisation of civil, political, and religious rights. An ample provision for the families of the heroes who shall fall in the contest. A liberal reward for distinguished merit. These are the objects for which we contend ; and to obtain these objects we swear to be united. In the awful presence of Almighty God, I, A. B., do voluntarily declare that I will endeavour, to the utmost of my power, to obtain the objects of this union; namely, to recover those rights which the Supreme Being, in His infinite bounty, has given to all men; that neither hopes nor fears, rewards nor punishments, shall ever induce me to give any information, directly or indirectly, concerning the business, or of any member of this or any similar society. So help me God."

Wood, a soldier, and one of the most desperate of the gang, had proposed a wild scheme. On the north side of the parade, in St. James's Park, there still stands, flanking the Treasury, a long Egyptian gun, taken by us at Alexandria. We have most of us carelessly passed it a thousand times in the sun and rain. Wood proposed to secretly load this gun, adjust it, then get himself placed sentinel over it on the day when parliament was opened, and fire it at the king's coach. To use the very words, afterwards sworn to at the trial, this desperate man said at the Oakley Arms, openly before his comrades, and with their approval: "I will post myself sentry over the great gun in the park, and load it, and fire at his Majesty's carriage as it passes in going tothe House." Wood was a saldicr, and in the course of his duty might sometimes be sentinel at that gun. He also spoke of the Mall, between the private gate of his Majesty and Buckingham House, as being the most proper place in which to attack the king, because there would be no Horse Guards there when his Majesty came out of his private gate, after levee-day, to go to Buckingham House.

Broughton then drew aside Emblin, the new comer, and said, " My boy, we have the com-

pletest plan in the world, which will do the ites without any trouble. It is to load the

great gun in the Park with four balls, or chainshot, and fire it at his Majesty as he returns from

the House." Then, with a kind of sneer, he said, "He would be d———d if that did not send them to h——."

Emblin, unaccustomed to blood, replied, "Good God! do you consider how many people will be in the Park that day, and how many lives you will take away?" Wood said, " Let them get out of the way; it will play h— with the houses at the Treasury and round about there." Some other soldier then observed, "The cannon might be too low;" another said, " It might be easily raised an inch;" and a third man remarked, "But if it misses his Majesty?" Broughton replied, "Then, d—n him, we must man-handle him."

All the rough men assembled in the smoking-

room of the suburban tavern round the grim disguised leader, applauded the scheme, and agreed that it must be done before the man-eaters (parliament) met. At the Coach and Horses, Whitechapel, and the Tyger, on Tower Hill, other meetings were held; and it was decided by Despard first to kill the king, then attack the Parliament House and the Tower. The colonel was generally spoken of among the other conspirators by the playful synonym of "the nice man." The men were desperate, the plot was ripe, parliament was soon to meet, and the gun on the parade was ready for the chain-shot.

On the 16th of November, 1802, the conspirators met in an upper room of the Oakley Arms, in an obscure part of that dim damp brickkiln region of Lambeth. There were about thirty soldiers and Irishmen of the humblest class in the room, surrounding a stern-faced thick-set man in shabby clothes, and with a plaid cotton handkerchief wound round his neck.

Their clamorous talk is about cutting telegraphs, attacking the Tower and India House, and blowing the King to perdition. Wood is earnest about putting plenty of balls in the gun on the parade, and the plan of attack on the coach, if the desperate aad failed, is arranged. Suddenly a diabolical fury seems to seize Colonel Despard. He leaps from his chair, eager at once to fall on his persecutors with the sword. He shouts " One and all!" and the thirty men push for the door; but a cluster of rough armed men stop them there, and leap in among them. It is the patrol. There is a scuffle with the colonel about searching him, and on him, when searched, nothing is found; there is a great calling of coaches, and forcing refractory men in; and then twelve of Despard's men are driven to the Tothill-fields Bridewell, and twenty to the new prison at Clerkenwell. ‘Ten other persons, trapped in another room, and proved to have no connexion with the colonel's party, were at once discharged. The colonel remained obstinately silent.

The king's evidence was a spy named Windsor, a private in the Grenadier Guards (First Battalion). He had been drawn in by Francis, who swore him: in at a meeting at a public-house in St. Giles's. Francis informed Mr. Bownas, an army agent, who had given him directions what to do.

The privy council instantly issued a special commission, composed of four judges, which was opened at the new court-house, at Horsemonger-lane, Southwark, January 20, 1803.

The commissioners were Lord Chief Justice Ellenborough, lord president; Sir Alexander Thomson, Sir Simon Le Blanc, Sir Alan Chambre, Sir John William Rose, Serjeants Remmington, Bailey, and Onslow.

Lord Ellenborough delivered his charge on the 21st to the grand jury. The same day the jury returned a true bill for high treason against Edward Marcus Despard, John Wood, Thomas Broughton, John Francis, Thomas Phillips,

Thomas Newman, Daniel Tyndall, John Doyle,

James Sedgwick Wratten, William Lander, am, Samuel Smith, and John Mac-

Arthur G@ namara.

At the request of the prisoner Despard, Mr. Serjeant Best and Mr. Gurney were assigned his counsel.

All the prisoners pleaded Not Guilty. Mr. Jekyll and Mr. Hovell were om am counsel to all the prisoners except Despard.

The counsel for the crown were Mr. AttorneyGeneral, Mr. Solicitor-General, Mr. Serjeant Shepherd, Mr. Plumer, Mr. Garrow, Mr. Common Serjeant, Messrs. Wood, Fielding, and Abbott ; solicitor, Joseph White, Esq.

Macnamara was an Irish carpenter; Graham, a slater; Wratten, a shoemaker; Broughton, a carpenter; Wood and Francis were soldiers. It was the old cruel story of those unhappy times. A reckless conspiracy, fomented by spies until it was ripe, and then crushed by a stupid but firm minister. It was spies who had urged on all the treasonable conversation.

Mr. Serjeant Best made a brave fight of it for poor Despard, contending that there was no proof of his sharing in the attempt to seduce the army from its allegiance. "It is a rule," he said, "‘of law upon the subject of treason, that the crime cannot be made out by mere words, but must be evidenced by acts, deeds, or writings. I mean to say that it is not upon the parole testimony of witnesses only that a man is to be convicted. But it may be said there is a printed paper found in this case. I do not care whether that paper be treasonable or not, is it connected with Colonel Despard, except by the testimony of Francis, one of the most infamous men alive? According to the evidence, the traitorous scheme was on the eve of being carried into execution. The Tower was to be seized on the 6th of September, and yet xo evidence is offered to show why this important step was wot carried out. Gentlemen, there were no deeds of preparation; there are no writings, the peueie or knowledge of which is brought

ome to Colonel Despard.

"It is a rule of evidence that the case shall be made out by credible witnesses. I say accomplices may be called, but their evidence ought not to be regarded unless a complete crime is proved by other witnesses; that is, their evidence may be used to corroborate the evidence of other and credible witnesses. Ask yourselves whether one tittle of evidence to affect the gentleman who now stands before you has been proved in this case, except by the evidence of accomplices. Unless his being present at the meeting at the Oakley Arms is Sufficient to prove he is guilty, there is no other circumstance but what comes from accomplices. It may be said that though the testimony of one of the four—Windsor, Francis, Blades, and Emblin—would be insufficient, yet the concurrent testimony of the four is sufficient. But, gentlemen, if men conspire to fasten a crime about the neck of others, they will take care that all their stories agree. Show there is ground to presume they have concerted

together for the against Colonel to themselves, and there is an end of all their evidence. In the sequel of what 1 have to say, I think [I shall prove that such a conspiracy does exist in this case.

"The account given by them is improbable. Fourteen or fifteen persons assemble at a common tap-house, with no arms but tobacco-pipes, and form a conspiracy to overturn a government supported by the loyalty of millions. The men who have undertaken to do this are of the lowest order in society; they have no foreign connexion, and they have the enormous sum of fifteen shillings and sixpence in the treasury. You have no evidence of even forty men being ready at one period; yet the Tower was to be taken, the aelaenien stopped, the Bank seized, and the king attacked while surrounded by the Horse Guards. Is it likely that Colonel Despard should have said he would break through the Horse and Foot Guards and do it with his own hand? I think I have demonstrated that a more improbable scheme never existed. I am persuaded a traitorous scheme did exist, that some men conceived the design of seducing the army from their allegiance to the king, but, finding the integrity of the soldiers an insurmountable barrier, they felt they must devise some means of securing themselves from the consequences of their crime. There was but one way—and Windsor pointed out what that was—to secure himself by charging others. After telling Mr. Bownas he was weary of the treason, yet still to attend the meetings, still to do what only the most infamous man could do; although he knew the consequences, although he pretended to repent, to seduce other persons into it for the * purpose of betraying them. What had these persons to do then? That which Windsor did. And yet it is on the testimony of such men as Windsor and the others that you are to say this gentleman, whom I will prove to be a man of character, and whom you must presume innocent till proved guilty, is guilty of a crime.

"The circumstance of Colonel Despard being degraded from his rank as colonel after serving his country abroad, was well known—he was known to be an injured man. This made the conspirators look upon him as a man upon whose shoulders the treason could be conveniently thrown. He was invited to their meetings, they representing themselves as injured soldiers. And he was induced by sympathy to attend these meetings. It does not follow that he was therefore a traitor; every person who attended was not a traitor; thirty were taken, fifteen discharged. Although he was suspected of treason in 1798, and detained in prison three years, yet, as he was discharged, I have a right to presume he was wholly innocent."

The witnesses to Despard's character were of the highest distinction. Lord Nelson had not seen him since 1780, but he then considered him an ornament to the army, a Joyal man, and a brave officer. Sir Alured Clarke had known

sane of charging an offence spard which belongs wholl

him thirty years, always considered him a loyal subject and a zealous officer. Sir Evan Nepean, who had known the prisoner since he was under suspicion, said the testimonials he had brought from Jamaica were of the highest order.

Lord Ellenborough summed up—mercilessly, as might have been expected—and defended the credibility of the witnesses. He (Despard) had compassed the death of the king, which was treason by the statute of Edward the Third ; and he had also compassed to seize the king's person, and conspired to depose him, which was treason by a recent statute. The jury, after twenty-five minutes' consultation, returned a verdict of

uilty — Despard and nine other prisoners.

Despard was recommended to mercy on account of his former good character, and the services he had rendered to his country.

Colonel Despard, when allowed to speak, expressed his satisfaction with his counsel, denounced the witnesses, and denied that he had ever seduced them from their allegiance, or even had the smallest conversation with them on the subject. Lord Ellenborough, in passing sentence, referred to the wild system of anarchy and bloodshed planned by the conspirators, who had promised to make ample provision for the families " of those heroes who should fall in the struggle." He then delivered the sentence: "That they be taken back to the prison, conveyed from thence to the place of execution on hurdles, there to be hanged, but not till they be dead, but that while still alive their bodies be taken down, their entrails taken out and burnt before their eyes, their heads severed from their bodies, and their bodies to be quartered, the heads and quarters to be at the king's disposal." Colonel Despard and the other prisoners appeared much less affected than the spectators.

In prison, Despard and his companions behaved with resignation and fortitude. Lord Nelson's mediation for his old comrade was in vain. The parting between Despard and his wife was borne by both with dignified fortitude, and she waved her handkerchief to him as the coach was driven from the prison. That was at three; at five she came again for a second and last farewell and was refused admittance, the turnkey wishing to spare the prisoner any further pain. Mrs. Despard expressed her indignation at this cruelty, and declared her firm devotion to the cause for which her husband was about to suffer. From three to' half-past six, Colonel Despard paced his cell in. agitation, then threw himself jaded on his pallet, and slept for an hour and a half. When he awoke, he exclaimed, in an excited way, to the jailer who was there on guard:

"From me they shall receive no information. From me? No, not for all the gifts, the gold, and jewels of the crown!"

e then composed himself and became silent. He refused to attend service at the chapel on Sunday; did not receive the sacrament; and declined the assistance of a clergyman, saying that he understood very well what he was

about, and that such interference would only perplex him the more. When his solicitor came that evening, the colonel told him he wished to be buried with his countrymen at Pancras. At daylight that morning, the drop, scaffold, and gallows, had been erected on the top of the jail, and great crowds had assembled to see the sight. The Bow-street patrol and detachments of the Guards were stationed round the jail day and night, for the ministry was still very uncertain how deeply it was detested.

The prisoners all slept about two hours, and, except their leader, spent the rest of their time with their priest and their dissenting ministers, preparing for death. Before daybreak, seven coffins, two large bags of sawdust, and the executioner's block, arrived at the prison. At four o'clock on Monday, February 21, the drum beat at the Horse Guards for the cavalry to assemble ; soon afterwards, crowds began to fill the Westminster-road and all the approaches to Horsemonger-lane. At five, the bell of St. George's commenced tolling. At six, Lord Cathcart arrived at the head of the Life Guards ; troops were stationed at the Obelisk, the Borough-road, and the Elephant and Castle; other troops patrolled the various adjacent streets. The officers, runners, and petty constables, were formed two deep in front of the prison, leaving a space of twenty yards from the walls unoccupied.

At half-past six the prison bell rang, and the cells were instantly unlocked. Five of the prisoners attended prayers, four confessed they had done wrong, but not to the extent of the evidence, and all said they were never happier in their lives. Despard and Macnamara then had their irons knocked off and their arms and hands bound. The sheriff kindly asked the colonel if he could render him any last service. The colonel thanked him in a gentleman-like way, but replied that he could not. He had previously dressed with composure, and drank two glasses of wine. He was well clad, in a blue double-breasted coat with gilt buttons, a cream-coloured waistcoat with narrow gold lace binding, and a flannel inside vest with scarlet top turned over —a fashion still seen among elderly country gentlemen only a few years back. He also wore grey breeches, top-boois, and a brown surtout. Before he was bound, he shook hands cordially with his solicitor, and returned him many thanks for his kind zeal and attention.

On hearing the clink and fall of the colonel's irons, the five prisoners in the chapel rose from their knees, and their arms and hands also were bound. The sledge—the body of a small cart, lined with straw, and drawn by two horses —was now ready, and the sheriff was summoned. When Despard saw the sledge, he smiled, and said contemptuously: "Ha! ha! What nonsensical mummery is this!" He then retired to the back and motioned to Francis, who had made way for him to go first. A regiment of cavalry were drawn up in Kent-street, and several companies of

foot soldiers were placed between the King's Bench and Blackman-street. The Bow-street officers were in two ranks from the inner prison gate to the keeper's house, and the procession passed between them. There were fifty Bowstreet runners on the scaffold. The roofs of the neighbouring houses were crowded, as well as the adjoining windows and fields. The ghastly procession commenced exactly at half-past eight. The sledge bore two prisoners at a time. First, Macnamara and Graham; then, Wratten and Broughton; then, Wood and Francis—all composed, and most of them smiling.

Colonel Despard came last and alone. He looked well, and stepped into the cart with quiet indifference. On either side of him sat executioners with naked cutlasses. The bell then began to toll. The seven coffins were placed side by side on the coffin near the ominous sack of sawdust. One by one the prisoners ascended, and had each his cord fastened round his neck. Macnamara, who had been recently married, bowed to the symsg people, and then prayed aloud. Graham looked pale and ghastly, and was silent. Wratten came up firm. Broughton smiled as he ran gaily up the stairs; but when the rope was put on, he smiled no more, but turned pa e, and } sg earnestly. Francis, a tall,

ndsome fellow, was perfectly composed.

Colonel Despard ascended the scaffold with great firmness; his countenance underwent not the slightest change while the awful ceremony of fastening the rope round his neck, and ae the cap on his head, was performing. Te even assisted the executioner in adjusting the rope, and was very particular in placing the

noose under his left ear. He looked at the multitude assembled with perfect calmness. The clergyman, who ascended the scaffold after the prisoners were tied up, spoke to him a few words as he passed; the colonel bowed, and thanked him. The ceremony of fa-tening up the prisoners being finished, the colonel advanced as near as he could to the edge of the scaffold, = made the following speech to the multitude: ‘Fellow Citizens,

"I come here, as you see, after having served my country —faithfully, honourably, and usefully served it—for thirty years and upwards, to suffer death upon a scaffold for a crime of which I protest I am not guilty. I solemnly declare that I am no more guilty of it than any of you who may be now hearing me. But though his Majesty's ministers know as well as I do that I am not guilty, yet they avail themselves of a legal pretext to destroy a man, because he has been a friend to truth, to liberty, and justice——" [There was a considerable huzza from part of the popanes the nearest to him, but who, from the

eight of the scaffold from the ground, could not, for a certainty, distinctly hear what was Said. The colonel proceeded.]——" because ¢ has been a friend to the poor and distressed. But, citizens, I hope and trust, not-

withstanding my fate, and the fate of those who no doubt will soon follow me, that the principles of freedom, of humanity, and of justice, will finally triumph over falsehood, tyranny, and delusion, and every principle hostile to the interests of the human race. And now, having said this, I have little more to add——" he colonel's voice seemed to falter here. He paused a moment as if he had meant to say something more, but had forgotten it.] He then concluded in the following manner:—"I have little more to add, except to wish you all health, happiness, and freedom, which I have endeavoured, as far as was in my power, to procure for you, and for mankind in general."

The colonel spoke in a firm and audible tone of voice, but left off sooner than was expected. There was no public expression, either of approbation or disapprobation, when he had concluded his address.

As soon as the colonel had ceased speaking, the clergyman prayed with five of the prisoners. Macnamara talked earnestly with the clergyman of his own persuasion. Despard surveyed the populace, and made a short answer, which was not distinctly heard, to some few words addressed to him by Francis, who was next him. The clergyman now shook hands with each of them. Colonel Despard bowed, and seemed to thank him as he shook hands with him.

The caps were then drawn, and some of the

prisoners uttered a last prayer. At seven minutes om nine, the platform dropped, and seven dead men swung in the air. The colonel opened and clenched his hands twice; that was all. The rest died instantly, all but Broughton and Francis, who ane for a few moments until the executioners pulled their legs.

In about half an hour the seven bodies were cut down, Colonel Despard's first. The bodies were then one by one partly — placed upon sawdust, and the heads severed upon the block by surgeons engaged for the purpose. An executioner then lifted each healt by the hair, and carrying it alternately to the right and left parapet, shouted to the people :

"This is the head of a traitor!" and so on, head after head. There was some hooting and hissing during the performance of this brutal medieval ceremony, more especially when Despard's head was exhibited. The bodies were then placed in the shells, and delivered to friends for interment. The people took off their hats when the bleeding heads were raised up, but there was no disturbance. Many people fainted in the crowd. The government, apprehending a riot, had sent rockets to the governor of the prison to signal for more troops if more should be required.

The body of Colonel Despard, having lain at Mount-row, opposite the Asylum, was taken away on the lst of March, by his friends, with a hearse and three mourning coaches, and interred near the north door of St. Paul's Cathedral, St. Paul's-churchyard. The crowd

was great; but when the grave was covered in, the people immediately and quietly dispersed. The City marshal was present, lest there should be any disturbance on the occasion.

The remains of the other six were deposited in one grave, in the vault under the Reverend Mr. Harper's chapel, in the London-road, St. George's-fields.
