# Attack at West Houghton


SEE ALSO Lancaster assizes

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000488/18120502/006/0003
Lancaster Gazette - Saturday 02 May 1812

TO DO

 On Wednesday and Thursday last, twenty-five men and four women were brought to our Castle, escorted by a party of Scots Greys, viz One for extorting money, at Manchester. Two for entering a mill, at Manchester, and stealing grain and flour. Eight for riotous and disorderly conduct, at Manchester, and stealing be::, cheese, &c. Eleven for selling fin; to a weaving mill, ware- house, &c at IVf-t Houghton. Seven for being present ;it and consenting to the administration of an oath ???? of the Bolton Local Militia, purporting to bind hm in seditious purposes On Monday the' 20th inst. the weaving mill of Messrs 1> Burton and Sons, at Middleton, was at- tacked t»y an infatuated mob, who had assembled in immense numbers at a distance, from various quarters. They came nearly in one body instantly up to the building, fired a pistol, and then suddenly threw a shower of stones, which was so violent that those who defended the place began directly to fire blank cartridges at the rioters, in hopes they would desist; but finding their expectations disappointed, and the assault continued with desperate fury, and loud cries of "break in and murder them," they were obliged, for the preservation of their lives, to fire ball upon the mob, till, in consequence of three men being killed and several wounded, one of whom afterwards died, they withdrew from the factory —They continued in the town destroying the furniture belonging to Messrs. Burton's servants, and threatening their lives, till a troop of Cavalry arrived from Manchester to their assistance. A company of the Cumberland Militia arrived in the evening, and protected the Mill during the night. On Tuesday, it was guarded by about fifty of the Militia; the mob, however, in the course of the day, assembled, in still greater numbers, and proceeded to attack the house of Mr Emanuel Burton, after ransacking and dividing the spoil, they set fire to the house, barn, stables, &c. which consumed the whole, with the furniture, valuable fixtures, &c. The damage is supposed to be upwards of ???*l.* A troop of cavalry arrived in the afternoon, who, with great exertions, assisted a part of the Militia who had been detached from the Weaving Mill, and after considerable firing, dispersed the multitude; one man was killed and a considerable number wounded. Since then the town has been more peaceable Messrs. Burtons have published a notice that they will not work their looms any more. The consequence has been, that about four hundred persons are thrown out of work, and reduced to great distress, and many of the workmen have been obliged to fly with their families from the town.


On Friday afternoon, the 24th ult. about four o'clock, a large body of rioters suddenly attacked the Weaving Factory, belonging to Messrs. Wroe and Duncroft, at West Houghton, about 13 miles from Manchester; of which, being unprotected, they soon got possession. They instantly set it on fire, and the whole of the building, with its valuable machinery, cambrics, &c. were entirely destroyed, the building being extensive, the conflagration was tremendous. The damage sustained is immense, the factory alone having cost 6000*l.* The reason assigned for this horrid act is, as at Middleton, 'Weaving by Steam.' By this dreadful event, two worthy families have sustained a heavy and irreparable injury, and a very considerable number of poor are thrown out of employment.

 Riots — In Cheshire, we are happy to find, that the deluded multitude, whose ferocious outrages threatened the most alarming results, and whose steps were immediately directed to their own injury, have relinquished their measures of violence, and are returning to their peaceable avocations. Chester county gaol at present contains no less a number than thirty-two of these unfortunate and misguided men, and some more were expected from the neighbourhood of Stockport. The following is an account of the particular offences for which they are committed: Three for rioting at Macclesfield. Seven tor rioting at Etchells and neighbourhood, and unlawfully obtaining money from John Parker, Esq Three for rioting at Styall, and obtaining money from several individuals. Two for rioting and setting fire to Mr. Goodier's house, at Edgeley. Seven for rioting at Baguley, and unlawfully obtaining divers sums of money from different individuals. Three for rioting at Bradbury, and feloniously entering the mill of Joseph Clay, and taking away, and throwing abroad, a quantity of flour. Thomas Whittaker, for administering, at Etchells, an unlawful oath or engagement to divers of his Majesty's subjects. Three for having taken an unlawful oath, at Etchells. John Parnell, for having taken, and been privy -.o others taking, an unlawful oath. James Radcliffe, for rioting, and having stolen and destroyed flour, at Bradbury. Wm. Walker, for rioting, and seizing flour and other articles, at Gee Cross. This man, a collier from Werneth, was considered as an active leader; marched before the deluded mob in a large cocked hat; and was distinguished by the appellation of General Lud. That poverty or want did not impel turn to the depredatiant with which he is charged, it evident from thit dreumttance, that six guineas were found upon his person, when he was recused at the Castle on Sunday last. Oh Friday the_c24lh uit. at toi-nighi, the nocturnal depredators entered the house of Mr. Dyson,; near Huddersfield, and took away such fire-arms as he possessed, threatening to murder him in case of refusal.
 
The soldier, who failed in his duty, at Rawfolds, was found guilty on Saturday week, and sentenced to receive 300 lashes. On Monday he was marched to Rawfolds, to receive his sentence; but, owing to Mr. Cartwright's humane intercession, the punishment was mitigated to 25 lashes.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000150/18120430/013/0003
Worcester Journal - Thursday 30 April 1812

We are sorry find that on Friday a large body of rioters set fire to the manufactory of Messrs. Ware and Duncuff, West Houghton, 13 miles from Manchester, which was in a short time burnt to the ground. The damage is immense, the building lone cost 6000*l.*

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002194/18120427/015/0003
Sun (London) - Monday 27 April 1812

"MANCHESTER, APRIL 25.--About four o'clock in the afternoon of yesterday, a very extensive weaving factory at West Houghton, about 13 miles from Manchester, was set on fire by the populace, and, with all the machinery, cambries, &c. burned to the ground; happily no lives were lost. Where this dreadfully ruinous system will end it is impossible to tell, as, from what I can hear, they are said to be resolved upon attempting the destruction of every kind of machinery that has tended to lessen the value of manual labour."

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001255/18120429/016/0003
Public Ledger and Daily Advertiser - Wednesday 29 April 1812

A letter from Manchester, dated Sunday, says—  
"Another act of desperation was committed on Friday last, when a body of malcontents attacked the factory belonging to Messrs. Wrae and Dulcuff, at West Houghton, which they set on fire, when the building, with all its machinery, was burnt to the ground. The damage is immense: the building alone having cost 6000*l.*. Not one of the incendiaries were taken, not a soldier being in that part the country."

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001651/18120430/019/0004
Globe - Thursday 30 April 1812

MANCHESTER, APRIL 27.

Early on Monday last, the Market-day at Rochdale, great crowds from the neighbourhood Oldham, Royton, Heywood, and places adjacent, flocked in for the avowed purpose of lowering the prices of provisions, it having been previously intimated by evil-disposed persons that such an illegal act would then be effected. The parties placed themselves in groups of about fifty or sixty in different parts of the town, as each group endeavoured to collect around them the inhabitants of the town and country, using inflammatory language; but much to the credit of the latter, few, if any, seemed disposed join them. The military being directly called out, and after the riot act had been read by Mr. Horton, the rioters were soon dispersed, without any other damage being done, and about eleven o'clock good order was restored. Much praise is due to the Magistrates, for their timely and precautionary measures, and the military for their prompt attention to the CiVil Power, and the readiness with which they quelled the disturbers of the public peace.

A large factory, at West Houghton, near Bolton, was burnt down Friday, by about 50 incendiaries, but no material mischief has been done in the town. Several suspected persons are apprehended, and all was quiet at the date of our advices.

TO DO

 - CARLISLE, APRIL 23. are sorry inform our readers, that the general spirit of discontent still prevails. Yesterday week, the people assembled great numbers neighbouring field, and from thence proceeded to Dalston, a village about four miles distant, where they broke open two warehouses, which they of their content-, consisting of grttin, flour, heicoii,.cheeses, tea, and shoes. The Magistrates, having received information, proceeded the scene plunder, which they reached about half-after eleven o'clock at night. By this time the greatest part of the multitude hud left the place with their booty: the soldiers, however, succeeded in securing some stragglers, and others who hud been imprudently drawn there through motives of curiosity, and lodged in the gaol of the city, men, women, and children, about fifty-eight. Saturday, Sunday, and Monday, the Magistrates were busily employed in examining the prisoners, /fifteen of whom have been committed for trial at the ensuing Assizes. Lite on Sunday night, or early Monday morning, party of several men attacked the coin-mill at Dalston, with the intention, it is supposed, of burning Ft; but as people had been appointed to watch the premises, and some dragoons were at no great distance, their purpose was frustrated, and they thought it necessary to decamp. Tuesday meeting of the Magistrates and neighbouring gentlemen was held in the town-hall, which was also crowded with the town's people,- among whom were several of the operative wei»er-. After number of inhabitants had he*-n sworn in special constables for Che constitutional protection of the place, Colonel Howard, of Corby, and Mr. Christian, of Uitrigg-hall, ariiire-oe-l the people. » Amongst things advanced, they stated, that froth the overstocked state the markets, and the iluilness of manufacturing sates, immediate advance .of wages »as impracticable that though the bufferings of the poor were great, yet in no: country were there' suck excellent laws for their relief—and that if the labouring mechanic found impos-ible to support hi* family, he ought to seek parochial relief.—Some of'the weavers, in reply, stated, that in consequence of the very low price of labour, they were compelled perform twice the former quantity of work, and thus nearly double the quantity of goods was manufactured by the same number of hands, as otherwise would have been, had wages been higher—that lb independent mind, the applications for parochial assistance was all tioea grievous» but more particularly tow'; a?, sucli caio, t»fy fioiud be compelled to part »hh children ti.ose, perhaps, at Wry tender age), atio, being bound •out as parish apprentices, would be removed.from that control and superintendence which every parent, whose is in the least impressed with the atvlul responsibility of such elation, wishes have over his children; and sooner than severed from them, they would endure any.hardships—that they had previously presented petition the Magistrates for an advance wages, praying to heard on oath respecting the sufferings tin were enduring; and even this last had been refused halss several of the City Magistrate manufacturers, they considered them unfit to judge their case—and that, though promises of advance of wages hid, recent Occurrence, been held out them, these promises were no longer iegnrded. The meeting broken-up without any thing having been determined. Very soon after,, deputation from the weavers waited Mr. Ciirislian, with the Petition they had formally presented to the ttiy Magistrates, in which were given abstracts funii two Acts of Parliament, asserting the power the to regulate price of manual labour according the price of provisions. Mr. promised them, that so soon it was possible, I.is fa:her, Mr. Curwen, who is m-w attending his Parliamentary duty, would held meeting the dotnity Magistrates, .when their Petition should be duly considered; and if any thing could be done to ameliorate their condition, they might rest assured it should not neglected. We understand, that Mr. Christian afterwards communicated to the Magistrates the particulars of what had been promised, which met with their cordial approbation. , . I:i consequence several threatening* heltl out by the populace, the Magistrates deemed it prudent to send off to Penrith and Whitehaven ; whence the Local Militia, who assembled with the utmost alacrity, in Carlisle—the former Wednesday, the latter Thursday mortiiiijr. The express only reached Penrith o'clock Tuesday evening; and though the ineii hid collected from the adjacent villages, considerable distances, and to equipped fr»eia the depot, they arrived here (a march 18 miles) 7 next morning. The Cumberland troop of Light Horse has also been duty dining the week. On Tuesday night a body of It) 12 men, with their faces blackened, iiltat the wa't-lunan belonging the of Messrs. Home, manufacturers, Denton-Hol:n, in consequence of some information he is said to have given respecting the rioters. The poor man was most dreadfully beaten: the a-Siiliii's (hen cump' bed his wife deliver his fire-nrnt*, with


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000488/18120425/013/0004?browse=true
Lancaster Gazette - Saturday 25 April 1812

RIOTS.

The present agitated state of the kingdom, arising from the want of employment, and reduction in the price of that little there is, is seriously alarming. The very heart and extremities of the country have more or less been the scene of popular tumult. Carlisle, Sheffield, Bristol, Leeds, Huddersfield, Truro, and Manchester, have witnessed the most disgraceful scenes of outrage. In most of these places, we are happy to hear, that by the exertions of the magistracy, aided by the promptness of the military, complete order has been restored. The Manchester Mercury of Saturday, says, "We have the satisfaction of assuring our distant readers, that this town has quite resumed its wonted tranquillity, and that no very serious breach of the public peace has occurred since the disgraceful proceedings of Wednesday week." It would have been gratifying to us, could we have added, that the public peace continued uninterrupted during the day in that populous town; but the contrary is the fact. On Saturday, soon after the market began, very large bodies of people congregated together, who manifested dispositions to outrage, and at length their numbers amounted to not less than twelve thousand! Betwixt one and two o'clock, the mob began their depredations upon the meat in the shambles at the New Cross, the whole of which was seized upon by the multitude, and carried off in triumph. The potatoes brought to market shared the same fate, and for some time, the proceedings of the rioters were unresisted. About three o'clock in the afternoon, however, the military, horse and foot, paraded the streets, and guarded the corn warehouses, which, as well as the shops, were shut, and all business was put a stop to.

 To the depredations above enumerated, we are compelled to add, that Macclesfield and Stockport, in Cheshire, have had their share in these popular excesses.—Monday week, Mr. Daniel Rowson, a fador of great business in Macclesfield, received a letter/row Stoclp.rt, threatening the immediate destruction of his and his neighbours property. Already the rioters had begun to assemble in the fields adjoining the town, and by noon, finding they had sufficient force to carry their determination into effect, they entered the market-place. They proceeded to enquire how potatoes fold, and not approving the price, began to throw them about the streets ; five bags were thus disposed of, when the foremost of them, having a blue ribbon in his hat, was taken into custody and lodged in the common gaol by order of the Magistrates. The word "rescue!" was given, the doors of the g .ol were broken open, the man fet at liberty, and carried in triumph to the market place in an instant of time, the mob hallowing and (homing After a short deliberation, two, apparently the ringleaders, held up a stick — the signal was answered by an uni- verfal huzza, and the whole body let forward to the premises of Mr. Rowson, in Mill street. Here they demolished all the windows, broke the door of the shop, and rolled the cheeses and other articles through the streets. When the destruction was complete, and another (hour of triumph had succeeded, they took the road through Pick- ford and Sunderland streets, ta the shops of Messrs. John Holland, Simon Malkin, Ru- pert Malkin, Samuel Clowes, Mathias Ma- fou, and several others, some of which they completely gutted, destroying the windows and furniture, and were guilty of greatest excesses as they proceeded. A company of the Royal Cumberland Militia were muttered by beat of drum immediately when the riot began. They followed the mob from street to street without success, some time, but coming up with them in Mill-street, the riot ad was there read by VV. Ayton, Esq. one of the Borough Magistrates. -The ad was repeated in the marketplace, without any other effect than further to exasperate the populace. The Magistrates, who had hoped to appease the tumult by shew of arms, now saw the iiecefliiy of employing force; but, still reluctant to shed blood by the use of the musket, they summoned the Macclesfield Troop of Volunteer Cavalry. The cavalry mustered at 4 p. in under their Cap- tain, J.S. Daintry, Esq. and marched to the Waters, and from thence on a band gallop to the factory of Messrs. Goodhall and Birchenhall, whither the mob had proceeded. The rioters fled as the cavalry advanced, but were not dispersed until they had broken the windows, doors, &c. of Mr. Wood, threatening his life.— The fields having been cleared, the mob again entered the town, and threatened a rescue of those who had been taken prisoners, but by the prompt measures of the military and the magistrates, order was finally restored. On the following morning three of the rioters, who had been secured, were examined, and were, under a strong escort, taken to Chester Castle, to take their trials at the next assizes. — Their names are Wm. Stubbs, John Livesey, and John Jackson. The total number of rioters at one period, amounted to at leal. 5000, few of whim, it appears, were residents of the town of Macclesfield Of the Macclesfield cavalry, two were severely hurt; Mr. Higginbotham, an alderman of the borough, had his arm broken; Mr. firimfditch, solicitor, received a severe confusion on the head : many others were struck violently, but none dangerously wounded. Of the rioters, one woman was unfortunately trampled upon, and had her arm broken ; and the prisoner Stubbs also received a deep gash in the head, when in j the ad of violently assaulting Mr. Grimf- ditch. The account of some serious disturbances at Stockport, is contained in the following letter, dated from that place, April 16: — " On Tuesday morning last, about eight o'clock, a mob began to collect at the outskirts of this town. The first act of outrage was on the mansion of Peter Marsland, Esq, in Eaton-lane, the windows of which they completely demolished —They then attacked a house in the Underbank, and proceeding up the Hillgate, destroyed the windows of Mr. Hindley's house; after which Mr. Radcliffe's factory shared the same fate; some ruffians had on the preceding evening, fired into the latter gentleman's house. At the same time, and in concert, another party destroyed the machinery, and gutted the fac- tory of Mr. J. Goodaire, of Edgley, and entering his house, seized the furniture, and fet it on fire in the middle of one of the rooms, but the cavalry coming up at this moment, saved the house from being consumed. An attempt made on Mr. Sykes's property, was also frustrated by the approach of troops. " The Magistrates ordered all public-houses to be shut up, and this preserved peace in the evening. On Wednesday the mob again assembled on Cheadle Heath, but after some deliberation, dispersed in various directions One party called at Sharfton-hall, the residence of Mr. Worthington, (of the house of Worthington, Baxter, and Co. Manchester) who distributed to them bread, cheese, and ale; after which, the villains, to (hew their gratitude, broke all his windows. " Nine of the rioters are committed to to prison. Ido not hear of any lives being loft ; but fey oral •* ere severely cut and much injured by the mob." We understand that serious disturbances have taken place at Wilmslow — that the Knutsford troop of cavalry were ordered thither to suppress the riot — that it was suppressed without loss of life or limb — and that three of the ringleaders are committed to Chester Castle.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0004607/18120907/028/0006
Evans and Ruffy's Farmer's Journal - Monday 07 September 1812

A most important cause his been decided at Lancaster Assizes. It was an action brought by Messrs. Wroe and Duncroft against the Hundred of Salford, for the recovery of the amount of their losses sustained by the destruction of their weaving mill at West Houghton, a short time ago, by a mob who set it fire. A verdict was given for the plaintiffs in the full amount of their damages, which were upwards of £7,000.
