# West Riding Revolt 1820


Via Dave Patten / @HuddExposed
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0HzxMXCu4Fo



https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yorkshire_West_Riding_Revolt

April 1 and April 11


Accounts of the action on April 1st

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000193/18200403/006/0003?browse=true
Leeds Intelligencer - Monday 03 April 1820

(Also in: https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000266/18200408/009/0003
Yorkshire Gazette - Saturday 08 April 1820)

DISTURBANCES AT HUDDERSFIELD.

For several days, the peaceable inhabitants of this town have been kept in a state of great agitation and terror, from the alarming indications in the neighbourhood. We present the following statements to our readers exactly as they have been given to us, only premising, that we collected them on the spot, from the individuals to whom they refer; and that depositions to the same effect have, we believe, been made before the Magistrates.

The civil authorities have suspected, for some time, that arms were clandestinely introduced into the neighbourhood; but, notwithstanding their vigilance, they were unable to ascertain the fact in a satisfactory manner. On Thursday last, a parcel from Birmingham arrived by the Regulator, addressed to "John Payne, Castlegate, Huddersfield," which excited the suspicions or Mr. Whitehead, the deputy constable, who thought it proper to wait the arrival of the person who should call for it. Towards evening, a notorious radical of the name of Gill, inquired for the package. Whitehead, who was in attendance, came forwards, and desired to know its contents. The answers of Gill were very evasive and unsatisfactory;— it was opened in his presence, and found to contain a sword, two brace of pistols, three bayonets, three bullet moulds, and two gun locks. An invoice was inclosed, from which it appeared, the charge for the sword was five shillings; for the pistols per brace, sixteen shillings; the bayonet and gun locks fourteen pence each; and the bullet moulds fourpence. A letter was also found, soliciting further commands; and stating, that the hurry with which the articles were required prevented them from being exactly according to order; that those sent, were of a superior quality; but, in the present instance, were invoiced at a reduced price. Gill was immediately apprehended: and the following day he was examined before the Magistrates, J. Haigh, and B. H. Allen, Esqrs. The account he gave of the parcel was, that Payne, who is a higler, and at present from home, requested him to take charge of it till his return. He was held to bail, to answer any charge which may be brought against him, at the next assizes.

This occurrence naturally excited the apprehensions of the Magistrates: and early on Friday, they received information, that great numbers of the lower class in the neighbourhood, were armed with pikes and pistols, and that in the course of that night, an attack was meditated upon the town, an a given signal, by numerous pikemen, in bodies of two hundred each. With the promptitude and alacrity which they hare manifested on many former occasions, every arrangement was made for the security of the town. A detachment of the 85th foot, under Captain Welling, and the 4th Dragoons, under Captain Sibthorpe, were held in readiness to act at a moment's notice; and late in the evening, the yeomanry were called out, and other precautionary measures adopted. The signal, a sort of tire balloon, was observed about two o'clock on Saturday morning; in the direction of Castle Hill, near Almondbury; and several parties of men, in regular order, were seen, in different directions, approaching the town. One division came so near as the Marsh turnpike, a short distance from the New Church. None of them, however, entered the town, having, it is supposed, received intelligence of the preparations made by the Magistrates. Two large bodies assembled on Barkisland Common, and proceeded on their way, as far as Lindley Moor; but not being joined, as they expected, by some other parties, they returned home, and dispersed quietly, except firing guns and pistols on their route.

A circumstance occurred the same evening, which convinced the magistrates that their apprehensions were not groundless. About eleven o'clock, a gentleman who lives near Cooper-bridge, was returning to that place from Middleton, accompanied by a game-keeper, and three other persons, whom they had accidentally overtaken. On arriving at the Obelisk, (or Dumb-Steeple, as it is usually called) near Kirklees, which, our readers will recollect, is the place where the Luddites rendezvoused, previously to their attacking Mr. Cartwright's mill, they passed about fifteen men, in a square or circle, apparently in close consultation. Two of the party, named Brearley and Smith, turned off into the New Road; and the rest proceeded towards Cooper-bridge. They had not, however, gone 100 yards, before they heard their late companions calling for help.— On returning back, and entering the road, they were surprised to see a number of men, sat under a hedge or wall, each armed with a pike or spear, and near them was a quantity of the same weapons, about 200, heaped on the ground. The gentleman, who was separated from his companions, took up one of the pikes, and was proceeding to examine it, when one of the men struck him, and he was attacked by several others. His waistcoat was cut by the pikes, but his person was unhurt. At the same moment a number of persons, at least sixty, came over an adjoining wall armed in the same manner. He saw them exercise, and they appeared to be very expert. The gentleman felt alarmed at his dangerous situation, and attempted to make off; — while doing so, a pistol or musket was discharged after him, the ball of which whizzed close past his head. He heard several other guns fired, as he returned home.— In the mean time, the rest of the party were attacked and beaten. One of them, named Tolson, received several pike wounds, particularly one on the left side, and is now under the care of a surgeon. Smith was cut in the hand, Early the next morning, information was given to the magistrates, and one of the men whom they were able to identify, a blacksmith, was apprehended, and is now in custody.

During the whole of Saturday, the military and civil power were on the alert. A number of additional special constables were sworn in; and several seizures of pikes and other arms, were made in the neighbouring villages, particularly at Almondbury. In a house at the latter place, a quantity of pike staves, great numbers of which have been cut from the neighbouring plantations, were found concealed. Some of the pikes, or rather, spears, we have seen. They are of very coarse workmanship, the blade about nine inches long, sharp pointed, and having at the broad end a screw, with which they are fastened into a pole, about 7 feet long.

Parties, of horse and foot patrolled the town and neighbourhood during the whole of Saturday night, and two men were apprehended at an early hour on Sunday morning. A large party was seen assembled on Saturday night, about four miles from Huddersfield in the neighbourhood of Hartshead, but they dispersed before the military were apprised of their meeting.

The town and neighbourhood were tranquil during the whole of yesterday; but several apprehensions were expected to take place, in the course of last night.

The following persons are in custody, on charges connected with these proceedings:— *Joseph* and *Benjamin Barker*, of Mirfield; *John Lindley*, of Mirfield; *George Barker*, of Colne-Bridge; *Joshua Hirst*, of Deighton.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000076/18200408/007/0003
Leeds Mercury - Saturday 08 April 1820

TO DO

HUDDERSFIELD, April 7.

The town of Huddersfield and its neighbourhood have been suddenly thrown into a state of considerable agitation and alarm. The civil authorities, and the military power, have been kept upon the alert day and night ever since Friday last, and the peaceable and well disposed inhabitants are preparing to co-operate with them, either as special constables, or under the establishment of the watch and ward act, for the security of their lives and property, and the maintenance of the public peace. For three weeks past the Magistrates have had information, that a simultaneous rising was intended in the manufacturing districts of the kingdom; and in the course of last week it came to our knowledge, that emissaries were going about the country exciting the people to arm, and preparing them for some desperate enterprise. We lost no time in apprising the readers of this journal of the approaching mischief, and in putting the unwary upon their guard against the instigaters; but this caution, as far as respected a very populous part of this district, was too late; for, on the night preceding our last day of publication, the insurgents had assembled in arms, and were preparing to strike a blow, at the contemplation of which the mind recoils with horror. In a matter of this magnitude, we could not satisfy ourselves with intelligence derived through the ordinary channels, but we determined to investigate the business in person upon the spot, and the following is the result of our information, collected from the most authentic sources:-

 A very unusual sensation was observed in many of the villages in the neighbourhood of Huddersfield, towards the evening of Friday, the 31st ult. The women were seen passing about to each other's houses, many of them in tears, and several of the men appeared unsettled, and as if meditating some daring enterprise. The Magistrates of Huddersfield, without knowing the precise time when, or the place where, the blow was to be struck, were informed of these indications by their agents, male and female; and the military, throughout the whole of the manufacturing districts of Yorkshire and Lancashire, were, we believe, that night under arms. About ten o'clock at night, the general muster commenced, and the initiated, in a great number of the populous villages, by which the town of Huddersfield is surrounded, began to assemble, many of them armed with pikes, some of them with fire-arms, and others with scythes and pitch-forks, purloined from the neighbouring farm-yards and out-buildings. a In some districts the bugle was heard to sound through the valleys, as the signal for muster, but the more general practice was to go to the houses of those who were known, or supposed to be favourable to the design, and to press into the service the head of the family. In some instances force, and in many others threats were used, to swell the ranks of the disaffected; and not a few of the persons called upon escaped out of their windows, in the rear of their houses, and relieved themselves from further importunity by finding concealment in the adjoining woods. The plan of operations was, it seems, to approach the town in four divisions. The Kirkheaton, Skelmanthorp, Grange-Moor, and Kirkburton sections, which may be called the South division, were to assemble at Almondbury-Bank, within a mile of the centre of the town. The Mirfield, Hartshead, High-Town, & Coln-Bridge sections, forming the East division, were to rendezvous in Kirklees-Lane, adjoining to the park of Sir George Armitage, ??? which is three miles from Huddersfield. The Thornhill, Dalton, Kirkheaton, Raistrick, and Brighouse sections, forming the North division, were to assemble in Fixby-Park. nearly two miles from that place; and the West division, which was the most numerous, and consisted of the Lindley, Quarmby, Out-Lane, Ripponden, and Barkisland sections, were to assemble on Lindley-Moor, about the same distance from Huddersfield, and all of them having in view the Castle-Hill, on which a beacon was to be lighted as the signal for the commencement of the march upon the town. Having thus surrounded the town, all the parties were to advance at the same moment, and while one division captured the horse barracks, and secured the cavalry, another was to take possession of the barracks occupied by the infantry, who were also to be secured; the civil authorities were at the same moment to be made prisoners, and the principal inhabitants of the town confined to their dwellings by the new provisional government. This desperate project, wicked and visionary as it may appear, was undoubtedly formed, and the capture of Huddersfield, with the stoppage of the coaches usually passing through that place, were to form the signals for the general rising! About 11 o'clock at night, all the divisions were in motion; the northern division, some of the sections of which had roused the peaceable inhabitants from their beds, and collected arms from them in their route, assembled in Fixby-Park, to the number, probably, of 200 or 300; the southern division had approached, but never, it appears, reached Almondbury-bank. The advanced-guard of the western division had, before 12 o'clock, taken their station at Greenhead, on the height which commands Huddersfield, and is within half a mile of the town; while the main body of that division was stationed on Lindley-Moor. In speaking of numbers it is extremely difficult to attain to anything like precision, but it is confidently asserted that there could not be fewer than five or six hundred men in the whole of this division. To the east the numbers were less formidable, and perhaps would not exceed from one to two hundred. When they had mustered at their rendezvous, near the Obelisk, on the Leeds and Huddersfield road, at the entrance to the Clifton-road by the way of Kirklees, they were passed by five persons in the neighbourhood, who had been at Middlestown on business, and were on their return home about half-past 11 o'clock at night. The attention of these gentlemen was first excited by seeing several persons standing in the road, apparently in consultation, but none of them with arms in their hands. In turning up the lane towards Brighouse, two of the gentlemen, of the names of Smith and Brearley, observed a number of men sitting under the walls, and at the same time saw, by the light of the moon, a glittering of spears. So unusual a sight, at this late hour of the night, induced them to stop, and Mr. Smith put out his hand towards one of the pikes, to ascertain what it was, on which he received a violent blow with the sharp edge of the pike, which cut his hand desperately, and induced him and his companion to hurry off, crying out "Help." This cry brought back the three other gentlemen, who were proceeding forward towards Cooper-bridge, and on coming near to the Park-wall, one of them, Mr. Robert Tolson, a master-manufacturer at Dalton, put his foot upon a bundle of pikes, and inquired what was there. The reply was given by a violent stroke, several times repeated, with one of the pike-handles, and at length a fellow, more desperate than the rest, made a thrust at him with a pike, which, taking a slanting direction, inflicted upon him a wound about the middle of the back, at the left side, about two inches in length and half an inch deep. On seeing his friend so ill treated, Mr John Hinchcliffe stepped up to his assistance, but finding that they were likely to be overpowered, they made off, though not till a pistol had been fired at Mr. Hinchcliffe, the ball from which he heard distinctly whiz past his ear. With some difficulty Mr. Tolson was got to Mr. Thomas Atkinson's, the Captain Commandant of the Huddersfield troop of Yeomanry Cavalry, where his wound was dressed, and he was some time afterwards enabled to return home, having suffered much less than might have been expected, Before midnight the magistrates were all assembled at the George Inn, the cavalry, which consists of one troop of the 4th Dragoon Guards, under Capt. Sibthorp, and the infantry, of three companies of the 85th Regiment of Foot, under Capt. Welling, were called out, while the Yeomanry Cavalry were summoned from their homes at a short notice. Soon after two o'clock, the beacon on the Castle-hill, which seems to have consisted of a quantity of shavings smeared with combustible matter, and hoisted on a pole, was fired. For some time the approach of the insurgents, to take possession of the town, was every moment expected; two or three sky-rockets had been observed to rise before this hour, and frequent reports of fire-arms were heard extending along the banks of the river to a considerable distance; but from some cause, which is not yet fully ascertained, the insurgents began to disperse in every direction, and the meditated attack upon the town was abandoned. This abrupt termination of an enterprize which appeared so menacing has been accounted for in different ways:- according to some, the preparations made by the magistrates and the military had intimidated the insurgents; another supposition is, that the brightness of the moon, which shone with unusual lustre on that night, prevented the signals from being distinctly seen; and another, and perhaps the most probable of all, is, that the leaders of these infatuated men, either from cowardice or treachery, forsook them in the moment of trial. As the morning approached, several parties of horse and foot-soldiers were sent out to reconnoitre the country, and to pick up stragglers, but not a single prisoner was made during the night, and it is a little remarkable that, with the exception of the outrage in Kirklees-lane, and the stealing of arms and other offensive weapons, no excess or depredation whatever was committed in the wide circuit over which this rising extended. The following persons were taken into custody on Saturday, Sunday, and Monday:- Joseph Barker, of Coln-Bridge, with his two sons, Joseph and Benjamin, who are all blacksmiths, and are charged with the fabrication of pikes, and with joining in the rising.- John Lindley, of Mirfield, nail-maker, on a similar charge. Thomas Blackburn, of Mirfield.-Nathaniel Buckley, of Ledger Bridge, a journeyman clothier.- Joseph Jessop and Samuel Jessop, of Hollinshall, Kirkheaton; and Joshua Hirst, of Deighton, all of whom are charged with having been in arms on the night of the 31st ult. A great many persons out of the disturbed villages have, we understand, absconded, in consequence of the part they have taken in these lawless proceedings, and the extent of the mischief to the distressed families of these infatuated men, is incalculable. The persons already apprehended, will, we understand, be committed to York Castle; but the Magistrates wait a reply from Government before they decide whether to make out the committals for high treason, or simply for a misdemeanor. It is remarkable, that in the populous villages of Honley. Berry-brow, Holmfirth, and along the valley of Smithwaite, where, on former occasions, a good deal of agitation has prevailed, the people do not seem to have made any movement whatever; and some of them, it is said, with a mixture of wisdom and pleasantry, observed to the instigators, that they would wait till the next morning, to see how the new Government went on. We hope, that in future, all their neighbouring villagers will be as wise as themselves, and all wait till the following morning. In the midst of all this external commotion, there does not appear to have been the least symptom of riot or disaffection in the town of Huddersfield itself, during the night of Friday-all was perfectly quiet there, except when the parading of the military broke in upon the general stillness, and apprized the wondering inhabitants of the danger with which they were menaced. The arms hitherto captured by the military, amount only, we believe, to three pike heads, a few side arms and fire arms, and several pike handles, with two or three scythe blades, fastened into shafts. The pikes are about nine inches long, resembling the head of a halbert, with a screw at the end, to fasten into an iron socket, which is rivetted at the top of the pike-handle, and the handles are from six to eight feet in length, some of them formed of ash plants, and others of deal, rather thicker than the handle of a hay-fork. None of the pikes which have been found, are formed to cut a horse's bridle; but we have reason to suppose that there are some such instruments, as an attempt, apparently by the way of experiment, was made with one of them to cut a gentleman's bridle, who was last Sunday night riding between Thornhill and Kirkheaton, but which, missing the rein, caught the gentleman's pantaloon, and tore it from the knee to the ancle.

 There is some reason to suppose that arms have been clandestinely introduced into the neighbourhood of Huddersfield for some time past, but to what amount is not known. On the day preceding that on which the villagers assembled in hostile array, a parcel came to Huddersfield by the Regular Coach, addressed to "John Payne, Castlegate, Huddersfield." Owing to a defect in the package, the end of a bayonet jutted out of the paper; this circumstance arrested the attention of Mr. Whitehead, the Deputy Constable, who waited at the coach-office till it was called for by one Gill, the servant of Payne, who is a hawker, when it was opened in his presence, and found to contain two brace of pistols, three bayonets, two bullet moulds, one for musket and the other for pistol balls, and two gun locks. There was also an invoice inclosed, from which it appeared that these articles were charged at about one-half the usual price. In consequence of this discovery, Gill underwent an examination before the Magistrates, and was held to bail. Since Friday night there have been no symptoms of disturbance in the town or neighbourhood of Huddersfield, with the exception of some expression of popular disfavour towards the Yeomanry, who were assailed on Tuesday last with loud hisses in the street, in consequence of which the town for some time wore an alarming appearance, but this appears to have been a mere ebullion, and the public peace was almost instantly restored. A person from Honley, who was said to have distinguished himself in raising the clamour, was pursued by a mounted Yeoman into a tobacconist's shop, and being apprehended, was held to bail. On Wednesday night last, at seven o'clock, the Magistrates of Huddersfield, Joseph Haigh, Benjamin Haigh Allen, and John Horsfall, Esqs. convened a meeting of the inhabitants, at the George Inn, intimating that they had a communication to make to them of considerable importance. At this meeting, about 100 of the principal inhabitants and tradespeople of the town attended, and Mr. Haigh having taken the chair, he proceeded to state - That the town and neighbourhood of Huddersfield were in a state so alarming as to call for the greatest vigilance on the part of the respectable inhabitants. It appeared, he said, not from vague rumour, but from depositions taken before the Magistrates, that a simultaneous rising was to take place throughout all the manufacturing districts of the kingdom, extending even to Scotland, and that the signal for that rising was to have been the capture of Huddersfield and the stoppage of the coaches. The Magistrates, he said, had certain information that there on Friday night last from 1,600 to 2,000 persons in arms in the neighbourhood of Huddersfield, whose object it was, to change by force the existing order of society, and to rob and plunder the respectable part of the community. A delegate, whom they well knew, and on whom they had kept an eye, had come over from Nottingham to that place, on Thursday, the 30th ult. and had convened a meeting of delegates, at which twenty were present. On the meeting being dissolved, these men were despatched into various parts of the country, and each of them had a ticket given to him, on which was written a significant word (which the chairman mentioned, but which it may perhaps not be advisable to state in a public newspaper,) and these cards when cut in two, were to form a sign and counter-sign by which the leaders were to be known. From causes which could not at present be explained, the wicked designs of the lawless had been hitherto frustrated, but there was no reason to suppose that their intentions had been altered.- Or :'Its this allrnirmng state of tistigsgoit becanse site dnity liti ?? of site inhabitants to utiito fnir the preservation of tiseirwi lavso, their personsantsi'their property, ?? this meeting was called to obtai tirie satisfaction of the inhabitants CO bs'to an application to be tiade by rite ?? to site Iso n Lord-lieutenaint, for powers to bring into operation, if hisi it it should be found necessary, and certainly not otherwise, the waftit and tardatclat, in this district. He was persuaded that no other arguments would be required to obtain the consent of the inhabitants to this measure, than the mere statement, that had it not been for the timely discovery of the plot of Friday night, such were the diabolical designs of the conspirators, that it was probable that not one of the persons present at this meeting would, at this time, have had a house to go into. This was the substance of the communication, and it is scarcely necessary to add, that the meeting instantly gave them their sanction to the application to the Lord-lieutenant. In the course of the communication the Chairman very candidly admitted, that he did not believe that the reformers, as a body, had any thing to do with the conspiracy, which had spread such very general and well-founded alarm through the neighbourhood—the conspirators were the mete dregs of society.

Though we have already bestowed upon this subject more room than we can well afford, yet we cannot quit it without a few observations. In instituting the inquiry which we have thought it our duty to make, we found no difficulty in collecting the details of the transactions which have taken place: but when we came to the inquiry.—How has this plot originated—who are its authors,—and what are its objects? the clue failed us, and our inquiries came to a stand. It is clear, indeed, that there is a great deal of distress in th country,—we may say, extreme and unprecedented distress, and that in such a state of things, it is easy to find, men, who, adopting the desperate reasoning, that it is as well to die on the gallows or by the point of the sword, as to be starved to death for want, are ready to give in to any project, however atrocious; but then there must be some head, some projectors, some instigators,-and the question is, who are they? This mystery we hope the magistrates, who seem to have displayed great zeal and intelligence, will endeavour fearlessly to unravel, and let the guilt rest wherever it may happen to fall. It is in vain to punish a few poor, ignorant, half starved dupes. The terrors of their own minds, and the distresses of their families, will teach them, it is to be hoped, never again to embark in such mad and wicked projects, but if some of the heads can be laid hold of, and exposed or brought to justice, an essential benefit will be rendered to society. It would be uncandid to deny that there is a great degree of disaffection in the country; and it would be equally uncandid to conceal, that the main cause of this disaffection is the extent of the public distress. Something must be done to restore the national prosperity, and to revive our almost extinct trade and manufactures. The public debt is a millstone so heavy, that if not diminished, it will sink the country. Mr. Ricardo's plan, or some other plan of a similar nature, must sooner or later be adopted; and we do beseech the Legislators of the country to save us from anarchy on the one hand, or from military rule on the other, by turning their undivided attention instantly to this topic, and by making it one of the first subjects of their deliberations on the meeting of the new Parliament.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000103/18200413/003/0001
Exeter Flying Post - Thursday 13 April 1820

TO DO

DISTURBANCE AT HUDDERSFIELD.

For several days past the inhabitants of Leeds have been in a state of agitation, from the alarming indications in the neighbourhood.

On Friday last, the Magistrates received information that great numbers of the lower orders in the neighbourhood were armed with pikes and pistols, and that an attack before the town was to be made in the course of the night by several bodies of pike men, 200 in each. Arrangements for defence were accordingly made, and detachments of the 85th Infantry and 4th Dragoon Guards were on the alert, and late in the evening the yeomanry were called out. At two o'clock in the morning of Saturday, a fire balloon, the appointed signal of the insurgents, was observed in the direction of the Castle-hill. At the same time several parties of men were seen advancing upon the town in regular order; none of them, however, entered it. The nearest approach was the advance of one column to the Marsh turnpike. It is probable the insurgents were deterred by the preparations of the magistrates.

Two large bodies assembled on Barkisland common, and proceeded as far as Lindby loor, but not being joined by sotl- parties they expected, they retired, discharging their fire-arms by way of bravado. On the evening of Friday, a gentleman, who was returning from Middleton to his residence at Cooper's-bridge, in company with a game-keeper and three travelers, whom he had overtaken on the road, passed 15 or 16 men in a square, sfaundim t near Kirklees, the old rendezvous of the Luddites before they burnt Mr. Cartwright's mill. Two of the gentlemens' companions turned off the road, and, accompanied by the other three, he proceeded about 100 Yards, when they were alarmed by the cries of their late fellow traveller. On returning, they were surprised to see a number of men ?? muider a hedge ?? armed with pikes, and about o00 of these weapons lying on the ground; at the same time upwards of 60 persons S armed in the same manner came over an adjoining wall. The gentleman, who was here separated from his companions, took up one of the pikes to examine it, when he received a blow from one of the pikemen, and was attacked by several others: a shot was also fired at him, the ball of which passed close to his head. The rest of his party were in the mean time cruelly beaten, and one of them, named Tolson, received several pike wounds among the rest a dangerous stab in the side; he is now under the care of a surgeon. Informations were next day sworn by the sufferers, and a blacksmith was apprehended and fully identified as one of the aggressors. During the whole of Saturday the vigilante and activity of the Magistrates were indefatigable; large quantities of pikes and pike-staves were detected. The pikes are extremely coarse and clumsy, fitted with a screw, by which they can be fixed into a handle. The staves are generally about seven feet long, and have been recently stolen from plantations in the neighbourhood. About four miles from Huddersfield, another assembly was observed on Saturday night, but they dispersed before the military could be brought to act against them. Nine Persons have been taken into custody, who will, we understand, be committed to York Castle; but the Magistrates wait a reply from Government before they decide whether to make out the committals for high treason, or simply for a misdemeanour.

*From the Leeds Mercury, April 8.*

On Wednesday night last, at seven o'clock, the Magistrates of Huddersfield, Joseph Haigh, Benjamin Haigh Allen, and John Horsfall, Esqrs. convened a meeting of the inhabitants at the George Inn, intimating that they had a communication to make to them of very considerable importance. At this meeting, about 100 of the principal inhabitants and trades-people of the town attended, and Mr. Haigh having taken the chair, he proceeded to state-"That the town and neighbourhood of Huddersfield were in a state so alarming as to call for the greatest vigilance on the part of the respectable inhabitants. It appeared, he said, not from vague rumour, but from depositions taken before the Magistrates, that a simultaneous rising was to take place throughout all the manufacturing districts of the kingdom, extending even to Scotland, and that the signal for that rising was to have been the capture of Huddersfield, and the stoppage of the coaches. The Magistrates, he said, had certain information that there were on Friday night last from 1,600 to 2,000 persons in arms in the neighbourhood of Huddersfield, whose object was to change by force the existing order of society, and to rob and plunder the respectable part of the community. A delegate, whom they well knew, and on whom they had kept an eye, had come over from Nottingham to that place, on Thursday, the 80th ult. and had convened a meeting of delegates, at which twenty were present. On the meeting being dissolved, these men were dispatched into various parts of the country, and each of them had a ticket given to him, on which was written a significant word (which the chairman mentioned, but which it may perhaps not be advisable to state in a public newspaper), and these cards, when cut in two, were to form a sign and counter-sign by which the leaders were to be known. From causes which could not at present be explained, the wicked designs of the lawless bad been hitherto frustrated, but there was no reason to suppose that their intentions had been altered. In this alarming state of things, it became the duty of the inhabitants to unite for the preservation of their laws, their persons, and their property; and this Meeting was called to obtain the sanction of the inhabitants to an application to be made by the magistrates to the Lord Lieutenant, for powers to bring into operation, if it should be found necessary, and certainly not otherwise, the Watch and Ward Act in this district. He was persuaded that no other arguments would be required to obtain consent of the inhabitants to this measure, than the, mere statement, that had it not been for the timely discovery of the plot of Friday night, such were the diabolical designs of the conspirators that it was probable that not one of the persons present at this meeting would at this time have had a house to go into. This was the substance of the communication, and it is scarcely necessary to add, that the meeting instantly gave their sanction to the application to the Lord Lieutenant. In the course of the communication the Chairman very candidly admitted, that he did not believe that the Reformers, as a body, had any thing to do with the conspiracy which had spread such very general and well-founded alarm through the neighbourhood— the conspirators were the mere dregs of society.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001651/18200410/020/0004
Globe - Monday 10 April 1820

TO DO

ALARM AT HUDDERSFIELD.

An account of meditated attack upon Huddersfield, by a large body of malcontents, was given in our Paper of Wednesday last. The *Leeds Mercury* of Saturday last contains a more circumstantial account of this alarming business, to which it adds the following particulars:— "The abrupt termination of an enterprise which appeared so menacing has been accounted for different ways; according some, the preparations made by the Magistrates and the military had intimidated the insurgents; another supposition is, that the brightness of the moon, which shone with unusual lustre on that night, prevented the signals from being distinctly seen; and another, and perhaps the most probable of all, is, that the leaders of these infatuated men, either from cowardice or treachery, forsook them the moment of trial. As the morning approached, several parties of horse and foot soldiers were sent out to reconnoitre the country, and to pick stragglers, but not single prisoner was made during the night, and it is a little remarkable, that, with the exception of the outrage in Kirklees-lane, and the stealing of arms and other offensive weapons, no excess depredation whatever was committed in the wide circuit over which this rising extended. The following persons were taken into custody on Saturday, Sunday, and Monday:— Joseph Barker, of Coln-bridge, with his two sons, Joseph and Benjamin, who are all blacksmiths, and are charged with the fabrication of pikes, and with joining the rising; John Lindley, Mirfield, nail-maker, on a similar charge; Thomas Blackburn, of Mirfield; Nathaniel Buckley, of Ledger Bridge, a journeyman clothier; Joseph Jessop and Samuel Jessop, of Hollinshall, Kirkheaton; and Joshua Hirst, of Deighton, all of whom are charged with having been in arms on the night of the 31st ult.

A great many persons out of the disturbed villages, have, we understand, absconded in consequence of the part they have taken in these lawless proceedings, and the extent of the mischief to the distressed families of these infatuated men is incalculable. The persons already apprehended will, we understand, be committed York Castle; but the Magistrates wait a reply from Government before they decide whether to make out the committals for high treason, or simply for a misdemeanor. It remarkable, that in the populous villages of Honley, Berry-brow, Holmfirth, and along the valley of Slaithwaite, where, former occasions, a good deal of agitation has prevailed, the people do not teem to have made any movement whatever; and some of them, it is said, with a mixture of wisdom and pleasantry, observed to the instigators, that they would wait till the next morning, to see how the new Government went on. M e hope that in future all their neighbouring villagers will as wise as themselves, and all wait till the following morning. In the midst of all this external commotion there does not appear have been the least symptom of riot, or disaffection the town of Huddersfield itself, during the night of Friday—all was perfectly quiet there, except when the parading of the military broke in upon the general stillness, and apprised the wondering inhabitants of the danger with which they were menaced. The arms hitherto captured by the military, amount only, we believe, three pike head*, u few side arms and fire arms, and several pike handles, with two three scythe blades, fastened into shafts. The pikes are about nine inches long, resembling the head of a halbert, with a screw at the end fasten info an iron socket, which is rivetted at the top of the pike-handle, and the .handles are from six to eight feet in length, some them formed of ash plants, and others of deal, rather thicker than the handle of a hay-fork. None of the pikes which have been found are formed to cot a horse's bridle; but we have reason to suppose that there are some such instruments, an attempt, apparently by the way of experiment, was made with one of them cut a Gentleman's bridle, who was last Sunday night riding between Thornhill and Kirkheaton, but which, missing the rein, caught the Gentleman's pantaloon, and tore it from the knee to the ankle. Since Friday night there have been *ymplom* of disturbance the town or neighbourhood Huddersfield, with the exception some exjiresfion of popular disfavour towards the yeomanry, who were assailed Tuesday last with loud hisses in the street, in consequence of which the town for some time wore alarming appearance, but tins appears have been a mere ebullition, and the pul; c pea.'e was almost instantly restored. A person from Honley, who was said to have distinguished himself in raising the clamour, was pursued a mounted yeoman into a tobacconist's shop, and being apprehended, was held to bail. On Wednesday night last, at seven o'clock, the Magistrates of Huddersfield, Joseph Haigh, Benj. Haigh Allen, and John Horsfall, Esqrs. convened meeting of the inhabitants, at the George Inn, intimating that they had a communication to make to them of considerable importance. At this meeting, about 100 the principal inhabitants and tradespeople of the town attended, and Mr. Haigh having taken the chair, proceeded to state— I hat the town and neighbourhood of Huddersfield were in a state so alarming as to call for the greatest vigilance on the part of the respectable inhabitants. It appeared, said, not from vague rumour, but from depositions taken before the Magistrates, that a simultaneous rising was to lake place throughout all the manufacturing districts the kingdom, extending even to Scotland, and that the signal for that rising was have been the capture of Huddersfield and the stoppage the coachs. The Magistrates, he said, had certain information that there were on Friday night last from 1,600 to 2,000 persona in arms in the neighbourhood Huddersfield, whose object it was to change force the existing order society, and to rob and plunder the respectable part of the community. A delegate, whom they well knew, whom they had kept an eye, had come over from Nottingham that place, Thursday, the 30th ult. and had convened a meeting of delegates, at which twenty were present. On the meeting being dissolved, these men were dispatched into various parts of the country, and each of them had ticket given to him, which was written a significant word which the Chairman mentioned, but which may perhaps not be advisable to state in a public newspaper), and these cards, when cut in two, were form sign and countersign the leaders wore known. From causes winch could not present, be explained, the wicked designs of the lawless have been hitherto frustrated, but there was no reason suppose that their intentions had been altered. In this alarming stale of things, it became the duly of the inhabitants to unite for the their laws, their persons, and their property, and this meeting was railed obtain the sanction of > I lie inhabitants application made by the Magistrates to the Lord Lieutenant, for powers bring into operation, if it should found sary, and certainly not otherwise, the Watch and Ward Act, this district. He was persuaded that, other arguments would required to obtain the consent of the inhabitants to this measure, Shan the mere statement, that had not been for the timely discovery of the plot of Friday night, such were the diabolical designs the conspirators, that was probable that not one of the persons present at this meeting would at ll|i»-lime have had a house into. This was the Communication, and it is scarcely necessary to add, that the meeting instantly gave them their sanction the application the Lord Lieutenant. In the course of the communication the Chairman very candidly admitted, that did not believe that the reformers, a body, had any thing with the conspiracy, which had spread such very general and well-founded alarm through the neighbourhood—the conspirators were the mere dregs of society."

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002357/18200411/020/0004
New Times (London) - Tuesday 11 April 1820

TO DO

HUDDERSFIELD, APRIL 7. [FROM THE LEEDS MERCURY, APRIL 8.] The town of Huddersfield and its neighbourhood have been suddenly thrown into a state of considerable agitation and alarm. The civil authorities and the military power have been kept upon the alert day and night ever since Friday last, and the peaceable and well-disposed inhabitants are preparing to cooperate with them, either as special constables, or under the establishment of the Watch and Ward Act, for the security of their lives and property, and the maintenance of the public peace. For three weeks past the Magistrates have had information that a simultaneous rising was intended in the manufacturing districts of the kingdom; and in the course of last week It came to our knowledge, that emissaries were going about the country exciting the people to arm, and preparing them for some desperate enterprise. We lost no time in apprising the readers of this Journal of the approaching mischief, and in putting the unwary upon their guard against the instigators; but this caution, as far as respected a very populous part of this district, was too late; for on the night preceding our last day of publication, the insurgents had assembled in arms, and were preparing to strike a blow, at the contemplation of which the mind recoils with horror. In a matter of this magnitude, we could not satisfy ourselves with intelligence derived through the ordinary channels, but we determined to investigate the business in person upon the spot, and the following is the result of our information collected from the most authentic sources: A very unusual sensation was observed in many of the villages in the neighbourhood of Huddersfield, towards the evening of Friday, the 31st ult. The women were seen passing about to each other's houses, many of them in tears, and several of the men appeared unsettled, as if meditating some daring enterprise. The Magistrates of Huddersfield, without knowing the precise time when, or the place where, the blow was to be struck, were informed of these indications by their agents, male and female; and the military, throughout the whole of the manufacturing districts of Yorkshire and Lancashire, were, we believe, that night under arms. About ten o'clock that night, the general muster commenced, and the initiated, in a great number of the populous villages, by which the town of Huddersfield is surrounded, began to assemble, many of them armed with pikes, some of them with fire-arms, and others with sithes and pitch-forks, purloined from the neighbouring farm-yards and out-buildings. In some districts the bugle was heard to sound through the valleys, as the signal for muster, but the more general practice was to go to the houses of those who were known, or supposed to be favourable to the design of the Radicals, to press il.to the service the head of the family. In some instances force, and it many others threats,. 'were used, to swell the ranks of the disaffected; and not a few of the persons called upon escaped out of their windows, in the rear of their houses, and relieved themselves from further importunity by finding concealment in the adjoining woods. The plan of operations was, it seems, to approach the town in four divisions. The Kirkheaton, Skelmanthorp, Grangemoor, and Kirkburton sections, which may be called the South division, were to assemble at Almondbury-bank. within a mile of the centre of the town. The Mirfield, Hartshead, Hightown, and Colnbridge sections, forming the Last division, were to rendezvous in Kirklees-lane, adjoining to the park of Sir George Armitage. Bart. which is three miles from Huddersfield. The Themahill. Dalton, Kirkheaton, Rastrick,- and Brighouse section is, forming the North division, were to assemble in Fixby-park, nearly two miles from that place; and the West division, which was the most numerous, and consisted of the Lind-Quarmby, Out-lane, Ripponden, and Bark-island • sections, were to assemble on Lindley-moor, about the same distance from Huddersfield, and all of them having in view the Castle-hill, on which a beacon was to be lighted as the s_„ifTnal for the commencement of the march upon the town.. Having thus surrounded the town, au the parties were to.advance at the same moment, and while one division captured the horse-barracks, and secured the cavalry, another was to take possession of the barracks occupied by the infantry, who were also to be secured; the Civil Authorities were at the same moment to be made prisoners, and the principal inhabitants of the town confined to their dwellings by the new Provisional Government. This desperate project, wicked and visionary as it may appear, was undoubtedly formed; and the capture of Huddersfield, with the stoppage of the coaches usually passing through that place, were to form the signals for the general rising! About ten o'clock at night, all the divisions were in motion: the northern division, some of the sections of which had roused the peaceable inhabitants from their beds, and collected arms from them in their route, assembled in Fixby-park, to the number, probably, of 200 or 300; the southern division had approached, but never, it appears, reached Almondbury-bank. The advanced guard of the western division had, before 12 o'clock, taken their station at Greenhead, on the height which commands Huddersfield, and is within half a mile of the town; while the main body of that division was stationed on Lindley-moor. In speaking of numbers, it is extremely difficult to attain to any thing like precision, but it is confidently asserted that there could not be fewer than five or six hundred men in the whole of this division. To the east the numbers were less formidable, and perhaps would not exceed from one to two hundred. When they had mustered at their rendezvous, near the Obelisk, on the Leeds and Huddersfield-road, at the entrance to the Clifton-road, by the way of Kirklees, they were passed by five persons in the neighbourhood, who had been at Middlestown on business, and were on their return home about half past eleven o'clock at night. The attention of these gentlemen was first excited by seeing several persons standing in the road, apparently in consultation, but none of them with arms in their hands. In turning up the lane towards Brighouse, two of the gentlemen; of the names of Smith and Brearley, observed a number of men sitting under the walls, and at the same time saw, by the light of the moon, a glittering of spears. So unusual a sight, at this late hour of the night, induced them to stop, and Mr. Smith put out his hand towards one of the pikes, to ascertain what it was, on which he, received a violent blow with the sharp edge of the pike, which cut his hand desperately, and induced him and his companion hurry off, crying out "Help." This cry brought back the three other gentlemen, who were proceeding forward toward Cooper-bridge; and on coming near to the Park-wall, one of them, Mr. Robert Tolson, a master-manufacturer at Dalton, put his foot upon a bundle of pikes, and inquired what was there. The reply was given by a violent stroke, several times repe ,ted, with one of the pike-handles; and at length a fellow, more desperate than the rest, made a thrust at him with a pike, which taking a slanting direction inflicted upon him a wound about the middle of the back, at the left side, about two inches in len g th, and half an inch deep. On seeing his friend so ill treated, Mr. John Hinchcliffe stepped up to his assistance, but finding that they were likely to be overpowered, they made off, though not till a pistol had been fired at Hinchcliffe, the ball from which he heard distinctly whiz past his ear. With some difficulty Mr. Tolson was got to Mr. Thomas Atkinson's, the Captain Commandant of the Huddersfield Troop of Yeomanry Cavalry, where his wound was dress, d, and he was some time afterwards enabled to return home, having suffered much less than might have been expected. Before midnight the Magistrates were all assembled at the George Inn; the malty, which consists of one troop of the 4th Dragoon Guards, under Captain Sibthorp, and the infantry of three companies of the Blith Regiment of Foot, under Captain Welling, we called out, while the Yeomanry cavalry were summoned from their houses at a short notice. Soon after two o'clock the beacon on the Castle-hill, which seems to have consisted of a quantity of shavings smeared with combustible matter, and heisted ort a pole, was fired. For some time the approach of the Insurgents, to take possession of the town, was every moment expected; two or three sky-rockets had been observed to rise before this hour, and frequent reports of fire-arms were heard extending along the banks of the River to a considerable distance; but from some cause, which is not yet fully ascertained, the Insurgents began to disperse in every direction, and the Meditated attack upon the town was abandoned. This abrupt termination of an enterprise which appeared so menacing, kas been accounted for in different ways: according to some, the preparations made by the Magistrates and the military had intimidated the Insurgents; another supposition is, that the brightness of the moon, which shone with unusual lustre on that night, prevented the signals from being distinctly seen; and another, and perhaps the most probable of all, is, that the leaders of these infatuated men, either from cowardice or treachery, forsook them in the moment of trial. As the morning approached, several parties of horse and foot soldiers were sent out to reconnoitre the country, and to pick up stragglers, but not a single prisoner was made during the night; and it is a little remarkable that, with the exception of the outrage in Kirklees-lane. and the stealing of arms and other offensive weapons, no excess or depredation whatever was committed in the wide circuit over which this rising extended. The following persons were taken into custody on Saturday, Sunday, and Monday: Joseph Barker, of Coln-bridge, with his two sons, Joseph and Benjamin, who are all blacksmiths, and are charged with the fabrication of pikes, and with joining in the rising. John Lindley, of Mirfield, nail-maker, on a similar charge. Thomas Blackburn, of Mirfield; Nathaniel Buckley, of Ledger-bridge, a journeyman clothier; Joseph Jessop and Samuel Jessop, of Hollinshall, Kirkheaton, and Joshua Hirst, of Deighton, all of whom are charged with having been in arms on the night of the 31st ult. A great many persons out of the disturbed villages haves we understand, absconded in consequence of the part they have taken in these lawless proceedings. It is remarkable, that in the populous villages of Honley, Berry-brow, Holmfirth, and along the valley of Slaithwaite, where, on former occasions, a good deal of agitation has prevailed, the people do not seem to have, made any Movement whatever; and , some of them, it is said, with a mixture of wisdom and pleasantry, observed to the instigators, that they would wait till the next, morning, to see how the new, Government went on. In the midst of all this external commotion, there does not appear to have been the least symptom of riot or disaffection in the town of Huddersfield itself, during the night of Friday; all was perfectly quiet there, except when the parading of the military broke in upon the general stillness,- and apprised the wondering inhabitants of the danger with which they were menaced. The arms hitherto captured by the military amount only, we believe, to three pike-heads, a few side-arms and fire-arms, and several pike-handles, with two or three sithe-blades, fastened into shafts. The pikes are about nine inches long, resembling the head of a halbert, with a screw at the end, to fasten into an iron socket, which is rivetted at the top of the pike-handle, and the handles are from six to eight feet in length, some of them formed of ash plants, and others of deal, rather thicker than the handle of a hay-fork. None of the pikes which have been found are formed to cut a horse's bridle; but we have reason to suppose that there are some such instruments, as an attempt, apparently by the way of experiment, was made with one of them, to cut a gentleman a bridle, who was last Sunday night riding between Thornhill and Kirkheaton, but which, missing the rein, caught the gentleman's pantaloon, and tore it, from the knee to the ancle. There is some reason to suppose that arms have been clandestinely introduced into the neighbourhood of Huddersfield for some time past, but to what amount is not known. On the day preceding that on which the villagers assembled in hostile array, a parcel came to Huddersfield by the Regulator coach, addressed to "John Payne. Castlegate, Huddersfield." Owing to a defect in the package, the end of a bayonet jutted out of the paper; this circumstance arrested the attention of Mr. Whitehead, the Deputy Constable, who waited at the coach-office till it was called for by one Gill, the servant of Payne, who is a hawker, when it was opened in his presence, and found to contain two brace of pistols, three bayonets, two bullet-moulds—one for muskets and the other for pistol balls, and two gun-locks. There was also an invoice inclosed, from which it appeared that these articles were charged at about one-half the usual price. In consequence of this discovery, Gill underwent an examination before the Magistrates, and was held to bail, Since Friday night there have been no symptoms of disturbance in the town or neighbourhood of Huddersfield, with the exception of some expression of popular disfavour towards the Yeomanry, who were assailed on Tuesday last with loud hisses in the street. in consequence of which the town for some time wore an alarming appearance, but this appears to have been a mere ebullition, and the public peace was almost instantly restored A person from Honley, who was said to have distinguished himself in raising the clamour, was pursued by a mounted Yeoman into a tobacconist's shop, and, being apprehended, was held to bail. On Wednesday night last, at seven o'clock, the Magistrates of Huddersfield, J. Haigh, B. H. Allen, and John Horsfall„ Esqrs. convened a meeting of the inhabitants, at the George Inn, intimating that they had a communication to make to them of Considerable importance. At this meeting about 100 of the principal inhabitants and tradespeople of the town attended. and Mr. Haigh having taken the chair, it appeared, he said, not from vague rumour, but from depositions taken before the Magistrates, that a simultaneous rising was to take place throughout all the manufacturing districts of the kingdom, extending even to Scotland, and that a signal for that rising was to have been the capture of Huddersfield, and the stoppage of the coaches. The Magistrates; he said, had certain information that, there were, on Friday night last, from 1600 to 2000 persons in arms in the neighbourhood of Huddersfield, whose object It was to change by force the existing order of society, and to rob and plunder the respectable part of the community. A delegate, whom they well knew, and on whom they had kept an eye, had come over from Nottingham to that place, on Thursday the 30th ult. and had convened a meeting of delegates, at which 20 were present. On the meeting being dissolved, these men were dispatched into various parts of the country, and each of them had a ticket given to him, on which was written a significant word (which the chairman mentioned, but which it may, perhaps, not be advisable to state in a public newspaper,) and these cards, when cut in two, were to form a sign and countersign by which the leaders were to be known. From causes which could not at present be explained, the wicked designs of the lawless had been hitherto frustrated, but there was no reason to suppose that their intentions had been altered. In this alarming state of things it became the duty of the inhabitants to unite for the preservation of their laws, their persons, and their property; and this meeting was called to obtain the sanction of the inhabitants to an application to be made by the Magistrates to the Lord-Lieutenant for powers to bring into operation, Wit . should be found necessary, and certainly not otherwise, the Watch and Ward Act in this district. This was the substance of the communication, and it is scarcely necessary to add, that the meeting instantly gave their sanction to the application to the Lord-Lieutenant In the course of the application, the Chairman very candidly admitted, that he did not believe that the Reformers, as a body, had any thing to do with the conspiracy, which had spread such very general and well-founded alarm through the neighbourhood---the conspirators were the mere dregs of society.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002194/18200411/008/0002
Sun (London) - Tuesday 11 April 1820

PROVINCIAL JOURNALS.

The following is an extract from the *Leeds Intelligencer* of yesterday, a paper always marked by good information and sound principles. The *Mercury*, to which it refers, is a Journal of so different a description, that it is well for the town that the former paper exists to counteract the *radical* tendency of the latter. But if the *Mercury* gives such an account of the *intention* of the *Radicals*, there can be little reason to doubt its correctness, and it is therefore rather surprising that a Radical Journal should so openly have developed that intention.

"We last week communicated to our readers, the alarming intelligence relative to the designs of the disaffected in the neighbourhood of Huddersfield. Several of the London Editors have insinuated, that, although there might be some ground for the suspicions of the Magistrates, yet, that the greatest part of our narrative must be fictious. We, however, can inform these gentlemen, who would scout all idea of danger till it has entered our very houses, that instead of exaggerating, we *under-rated*, the extent of the contemplated insurrection, and the consequent alarm; and that every subsequent account has more than confirmed our previous statements. We would refer those who are inclined to suspect the truth of our narrative, and to question the existence of a disposition to rebellion and outrage, to the *Mercury* of Saturday last. They will there find a detailed plan of operations, by which the town of Huddersfield was to be approached on the North, West, East, and South sides; and (says the Editor),—

"Having thus surrounded the town, all the parties were to advance at the same moment, and while one division captured the horse barracks, and secured the cavalry, another was to take possession of the barracks occupied by the infantry, who were also to be secured: the Civil Authorities were at the same moment to be made prisoners, and the principal inhabitants of the town confined to their dwellings by the new Provisional Government. This desperate project, wicked and visionary as it may appear, was undoubtedly formed, and the capture of Huddersfield, with the stoppage of the coaches, usually passing through that place, were to form the signals for the general rising!"

"We think the above must convince the most sceptical, as to the actual existence of a conspiracy of a very atrocious nature; a conspiracy which, but for the vigilance of the Magistrates, would have involved in ruin and misery a populous town, and perhaps occasioned the loss of thousands of lives! Nor was it in Huddersfield alone that the enemies of social order, and of the Constitution, were at work. Our accounts from Scotland state, that a simultaneous rising was expected in the vicinity of Glasgow, in which town (and also in Paisley and the neighbouring villages) the workmen left their employ, at the command of an anonymous incendiary, declaring they would not return till their grievances were redressed.— These towns were kept in a state of alarm for three or four days; and we have details to lay before our Readers, which will prove that those alarms were not groundless."




---

Accounts of the action on April 11th

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001427/18200417/010/0002
Morning Advertiser - Monday 17 April 1820

TO DO

Extract of a Letter from Barnsley. - "On Tuesday evening last the town of Barnsley was thrown into a state of considerable alarm, by a current report that the Radicals intended some desperate attempt on the security of the town: great numbers of the weavers were seen parading the streets during the afternoon, and in the evening assembled in formidable parties. It was thought advisable, in a meeting of the respectable inhabitants, to keep an eye upon their movements by a night watch and patrol; and about two o'clock on Wednesday morning they were observed on the extremity of the town, going on the Huddersfield Road. It appears also, that the insurgents at Barnsley were Joined by many from the neighbouring villages.

"A few of the patrol followed them about two hours afterwards on the same road, and one gentleman (who arrived before the others) got so near them upon Grange Moor, as clearly to observe them in ranks, and armed with pikes: he thinks the number was about three or 400, but he was soon compelled to retreat by two men with fire-arms! The other gentlemen, on their arrival at Grange Moor, found that the Radicals had dispersed at the sight of the military from Huddersfield: as we have before stated.

"Previously to leaving Barnsley, the Radicals roused several of the inhabitants in different parts of the town, and demanded their fire-arms, which were in general surrendered. At one house, however, they were refused, and in revenge broke twelve panes in the windows. In their route they called at many houses, demanding fire-arms, which they afterwards substituted for pikes, as several of the latter were found on the road. The Yeomanry were called out early on Wednesday morning, and sent in different directions during the day, attended by J. Scott, Esq. of Badsworth, the Magistrate, to search the houses of individuals in the villages, but no arms were discovered.

"In the evening three or four persons were taken into custody, and examined by Mr. Scott and Dr. Corbett, and committed for further examination. All the respectable inhabitants were sworn ‘in as special constables, and patrolled the streets all night. Yesterday nine others were secured, and the town Was in avery perturbed state. There is no doubt but these deluded men were disappointed in not meeting, as they expected, a large body of the Radicals from the neighbourhood of Huddersfield, &e. on Grange Moor. What was to have been their next object has not yet appeared. A poor woman, who went amongst the Radicals, previous to their leaving Barnsley, 1o dissuade her husband from going with them, received a severe wound from a pike, and it was expected she would die from loss of blood.

"The under-mentioned persons were committed yesterday, on the following charges; viz. William Holland, William Holt, George Burkinshaw, George Bryon, Abraham Ingham, and John Hobson, weavers, of Dodworth, near Barnsley, for riotously assembling, armed with pikes, with many others, and endeavouring, by threats, to induce William Seddous and George Bevers to join them, and for having been with the party who went to Grange Moor; Thomas Woed, Tubourer, of Dodworth, and Thomas Woodhead, weaver, for procuring pikes to be manufactured." '


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18200417/006/0002
Morning Chronicle - Monday 17 April 1820

TO DO

YORKSHIRE.—HUDDERSFIELD.

Accounts have been published by the Ministerial Prints of the insurrectionary movements near Huddersfield and Barnsley, which we noticed in our paper of Saturday. The details which are given by the *West Riding Chronicle* are to this effect. In consequence of the rumours prevalent in the town of Huddersfield on Tuesday last, the Magistrates had been induced to take precautions against an expected rising:-"Early in the morning of Wednesday," says the *West Riding Chronicle*, "mounted constables were detached in various directions, and particularly towards Grange-moor, on the Wakefield road, where it was rumoured the insurgents would concentrate their forces previously to a general attack on Huddersfield. Two Gentlemen, who were sent towards Thornhill at a very early hour in the morning, passed through a number of armed men, moving in the direction of Grange Moor; and two other gentlemen, who were sent to reconnoitre the latter place, about five o'clock, saw a very strong body, supposed to amount to 800 or 1,000, drawn up in close column on the Moor. The glitter of their pikes and other weapons in the grey dawn of the morning, gave them a very terrific and imposing effect. One of the gentlemen was directed to proceed to this place to communicate with the authorities here; but as soon as he was perceived by the insurgents, a number of them, amongst whom were two or three on horseback, pre-occupied the road, and compelled him to return with his companion." Preparations were made in Huddersfield to meet the overwhelming bodies which this intelligence caused it to be conjectured might move upon the town. The military in the town were, it is said, placed behind barricades; but, when a party often Yeomanry and sixteen Dragoons, under the command of Major de Bathe, marched towards Grange-moor, which they reached about 8 o'clock, the assemblage threw away their arms,and dispersed in all directions. Twelve persons were taken, and ten pikes, three hay forks, three guns, 21 pike staves, of eight feet, and 27 of four or five feet long were found, with eight pike-heads, and a quantity of cartridges, bullets, and several knapsacks. The staves were chiefly young trees; the pike-heads, files, hammered flat; banners were also found of the description mentioned in our paper of Saturday. It is a question, when we consider the sudden dispersal of the meeting on the appearance of 26 soldiers, and the amount of the arms found, how far the Gentlemen to whom the assemblage appeared terrific and imposing in the grey dawn, may have been deceived as to its actual numbers. One Corbeit, late a Serjeant in the 54th foot, who is said to have been a ringleader, and a man named Schofield, have been apprehended. Other arms have been found in the neighbourhood, in addition to those found on the moor. Meantime, at Barnsley, whence~ the persons who assembled on Grange Moor are supposed chiefly to have proceeded, much alarm was felt. On Tuesday evening, the weavers had paraded the streets in numbers, and about too on Wednesday morning, they were seen moving on the Huddersfield Road, being watched by a patrol which was established by the respectable inhabitants. It is said they were joined by many persons from the neighbouring villages. One of the gentlemen of the patrol from lirmsley, got so near them as to observe them clearly. I-le differs from the gentleman from Huddersfield as-to the number of the party, which he took to be about .500 or 400, instead of 800 or 100o. They were in ranks armed with pikes. He was compelled to retreat by two men with fire-arms. Before the rest of the patrol came up, the assembly had dispersed. Previously to leaving Barnsley, the insurgents roused several of the inhabitants in different parts of the town, and demanded their fire arms, which were in general surrendered; at one house, however, they were refused, and, in revenge, they broke twelve panes In the windows. In their route they called at many houses, demanding fire-arms, which they afterwards substituted for pikes, as several of the latter were found on the road. The Yeomanry were called out early on Wednesday morning, and sent in different directions during the day, attended by J. Scott, Esq. of Badsworth, Magistrate, to search the houses of individuals in the villages, but no arms were discovered. In the evening three er four persons were taken into custody, and examined by Mr. Scott and Dr. Corbett, and committed for further examination. Yesterday nine others were secured. It is said these deluded men were disappointed in not meeting a large body from the neighbourhood of Huddersfield, &c. on Grange Mdoor. The undermentioned persons were committed yesterday on the following charges, ?? Holland, William Holt, George Burkinshaw, George Bryon, Abraham Ingham, and John Hobson, weavers, of Dodworth, near Barnsley, for riotously assembling, armed with pikes, with many others, and endeavouring, by threats, to induce William Seddons and George Beevers to join them, and for having been with the party who went to Grange Moor; Thomas Wood, labourer, of Dodworth, and Thomas Woodhead, weaver, for procuring pikes to be manufactured.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000237/18200421/009/0004
Stamford Mercury - Friday 21 April 1820

TO DO

Revolutionary Movements. IN YORKSHIRE. the West Riding ChronicJe, April 14.] "From the time of our lest publication, the town of Huddersfield bad remained tolerably tranquil, until Tuesday last, when rumours another rising the following morning, excited considerable alarm hi the minds of the Inhabitants, whose experience had taught them that such rumours were not to be disregarded. The magistrates, as usual, were on the alert; and every precaution was taken for securing the town against the Impending danger. Early in the morning of Wednesday, mounted constables were detached in various directions, and particularly towards Grange Moor, on Wakefield road where it was rumoured the insurgents would concentrate their forces previously to a on Huddersfield, Two gentlemen, who were sent towards Thornhill at a very early hour in the morning, passed through a number armed men, moving the direction of Grange Moor; and two other gentlemen, who were sent to reconnoitre the latter place, about five o clock, saw a very strong body, supposed amount to or 000 men, drawn up close column on the Moor. The glitter of their pikes and other weapons in the grey dawn of the morning, gave them very terrific and imposing effect. One of the gentlemen was directed to proceed to Wakefield, to communicate with the authorities there; hut soon as he was perceived by the insurgents, a number of them, amongst whom were two or three on horseback, pre-occupied the road, and compelled him to return with hit companion. Between five and six o'clock, preparations were made in Huddersfield for enabling the military to resist the overwhelming bodies which was conjectured might be assembled on this atrocious enterprise. A barricade of waggons and carts was formed at the end of every street leading to the market-place, and all the military »" the town were inclosure. Shortly afterwards, party often yeomanry and sixteen dragoons marched towards Grange Moor, tinder the command of Major Bathe, of the 85th regt. On their arrival at the Moor about eight o'clock, the deluded wretches who were assembled there, immediately threw away their arms and dispersed in all directions. A pursuit commenced, and twelve of the insurgents (several of them from the neighbourhood of Barnsley) were apprehended. As many of them had been observed to abandon their arms, the Moor was searched, and the following articles found upon it:—A Jreen flag, inscribed, He that smiteth man that ie, shall be surely put to death;' tea pikes, from 8 to 9 feet king, with heads on; three hay forks; three single-barrelled guns; twenty-one pike-staves about feet long, and twenty-seven from 6 feet, all Which bore marks having beads on,but they had teen unscrewed or broken off; eight pike beads of various shapes; a quantity of blank cartridges and loose bullets; several knapsacks, &c. &c. Most of the pike-staves are made of young trees, and many of them have pieces of tin or sheet iron nailed hear the head, to preserve them from being cut sabres. The beads appear to be chiefly of the tame manufacture, and some of them are made out of flies, hammered flat. When these arms were collected, prisoners were escorted Huddersfield by the party who had captured them; and, after a short examination, were placed in. strict confinement, together with four others, who were apprehended during the day; some of them for insulting the soldiers, and uttering inflammatory language in the, streets.—During the whole forenoon, the town of Huddersfield remained in state alarm, which put a stop to business of every kind. " have since learnt with pleasure the apprehension of the ringleader, Corbett, late in the foot, which, we hope, will be the prelude to further discoveries. A named Schofield has been apprehended, with several others whose names we have not yet learnt. number of pike*, guns, and other weapons, nave been found in the neighbourhood of Grange Moor, and on the road between that place and Barnsley. white flag was also found near Grange Moor yesterday; has a* black border, trimmed with black crape and fringe, and bears .the following inflammatory You have condemned and killed the just; and he doth not resist.' And that bath sword, let him sell fab garment and buy one.' "Tuesday evening last the town of was thrown hi to a state considerable alarm, current report that the Radicals intended some desperate attempt on the security of the town: great numbers the weavers were seen parading the streets during the afternoon, and the evening assembled in formidable parties. Was thought advisable, meeting of the respectable Inhabitants, to keep an eye upon their movements a nightly watch and patrol; and about, two o'clock on Wednesday morning, they . Were observed on the extremity the town, going on the Huddersfield road. It appears also, that the insurgents st Barnsley'were joined many from the neighbouring villages. *'"»■! few of the patrol followed* thereabout two hours, afterwards, on-the same road, and one gentleman (who arrived before the others) got so near them upon Grange Moor, clearly td observe them ranks, and armed with pike?: thinks the about three four hundred, but he was to retreat by two men wtrh Rearms ! The* other gentlemen, on their arrival Grange Moor, found that the Radicals had dhwrrsed the sight of the military from Huddersfield, we hive before stated. * , '/' * Previously leaving Barrrstey, the Radicals roused several the inhabitants in different parts of the town, demanded their fire-arms, which were in al surrendered: at one house, however, they were refused, and, revenge; twelve panes in the Windows. In their route (hey called at many houses, demanding fire-arms, which they afterwards substituted for pikes, several -of the latter Were found the road. The Yeomanry were called oat early on Wednesday morning, and sent in different directions during the day, attended J. Scott, Esq. of Badswonh, magistrate, to-search the.; houses of individuals the villages, bat no arms were discovered. . * In the evening, three or four persons were taken into custody,, and committed for further examination. Yesterday nine others were secured, and the town was' In a very perturbed state. There is doubt but these deluded men were disappointed in not meeting, as they expected, large body of the Radicals from the neighbourhood of Huddersfield, &c. on Grange Moot." [From the Leeds Intelligencer, April 17.] " On Tuesday evening, an alarm was created Sh ejfiblo, by the assembling of number of disorderly persons in the market-place. They appeared to assemble upon the firing a pistol; and afterwards proceeded out of the town, about half a-mile on the Attercliffe road.— Their numbers augmented on their march to between and 900. What was their ultimate object, know » not; bat they returned to the town about 10 o'clock; when some .of them proposed stop the mail: others cried—" AH a mind to the barracks;" and others— Not till the Hth of April." Remember the 14th of April." latter advice was adopted; and after firing a few pistols, they dispersed. The following morning, a man the name of Black well was arrested, and underwent an examination. He appeared to the leader of. the party, and acknowledged firing the pistol. information could be obtained from bim, as to the object he had in view. He was committed to York Castle. At the March assizes in 1817, this man was convicted of rioting in Sheffield, and was sentenced to two years' imprisonment. A loaded pistol, a bayonet, and two pike handles. Were found in-the shop where Black well was at work. "On Wednesday afternoon, number of persons collected upon Beacon Hill, near Halifax, with a flag and music; and they met again about nine o'clock in the same place. They set fire to a bundle of straw, discharged several pistols, threw up sky rocket, ahd then dispersed. Extract of Letter from Barnsley, dated April 16.— "The plan of the Radicals was nothing short of revolution and high treason, Six men, already sent » York, are committed- for high treason; there are eight others in custody; and warrants issued out against twenty more. Pur yeomanry are out night and day, and exert themselves beyond all praise." [From the Carlisle Patriot.'} •The agitation among the Radicals of Scotland, was not looked upon with indifference the fraternity in the neighbourhood of Carlisle. In the course of Saturday night, a considerable number of a most inflammatory address, headed Regeneration and Liberty !" was stuck upon the walls of this city, and Kill greater number secretly circulated among the operative workmen. Though a great many laughed at this treasonable paper, there were others disposed to view-it in more serious light, and seemed not very reluctant to obey it, were obedience prudent. Various unauthorized meetings base been held in different parts of this neighbourhood during the week, connected with the subject, but we know nothing of the questions which came under discussion. The result of the Glasgow and Huddersfield business however, for the present postponed that grand day of regeneration which our radical doctors seem' to think desirable. We have a letter from a neighbouring town, which says—" The radicals here are quite on the alert, and seem to be in expectation of a sudden blow-up." This expectation, in fact, has been entertained in all the manufacturing parts of this district, for fortnight past.—There is no hope that such infatuated men will ever recover from the delusion which misleads them."

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002787/18200416/002/0001
British Neptune - Sunday 16 April 1820

TO DO

DISTURBANCES IN THE NORTH. BARNSLEY, APRIL 12.—Last night, our Radicals made their long-threatened rising. They contrived to avoid the town, to get on to the Huddersfield road, by a circuitous route. They ate estimated. at from three to five bundled, and started about one o'clock in the morning for Grange Moor, where they arrived about six, and expected to have been joined by one large body . from Huddersfield, and another from Wakefield. in ibis, however, they were disappointed; the Magistrates of 'these places had taken measures to prevent such a jnocion.-." Ither staying a little time, therefore, in a plantation on the moor, they became spiritless, and began to steal home again as well as they could. They went at toed with pikes, which they threw away when their cause became hopeless. their way out they stopped at Bench Lane, - tout, and Bretton, and by threatenings procured six Etths, The town has for some days been under ..great agitation. exretiug some movement, without being able to ascertain whi!ber it was be +lireeted. No mischief is done." " LEEDS, APRIL 12.--1" am very sorry to give an, alarming account of the state of the contitty round Huddersfield. I attended the market there yesterday. This Snot Mil" I disturbed by the noise and din of war, at o'clock. The Yeomanry Cavalry. and Infantry were promptly under arms, and every avenue to the square was locked op by waggons, carts, The inhabitants, under the dire c ti on of the Magistracy, were soon ready to receive the attack of a large force of Radicals which were assembled at Grange Moor, with pikes, muskets, forks, flags, and a drum and fife; in order to attack the town of Huddersfield. Their intention was happily frustrated by the precaution taken, The 6th regiment made forced march, and reached Huddersfield from Halifax in a short time ;- they the town about eleven. — All the shops were closed, and business of COIIISE suspended. A cart load of pikes, guns, forks, and ammunition were taken, with one flag and eleven prisoners, whom I saw brought in. I left Huddersfield at half past three, and it bliss then reported an express had arrived, stating, that 


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000266/18200415/027/0004
Yorkshire Gazette - Saturday 15 April 1820

TO DO

[FROM THE LEEDS INDEPENDENT, APRIL 13.] "At a late hour last night, we received the follow, communication from a respectable Correspondent, dated Huddersfield, 12th April: v Our Magistrate! having obtained good information that a large Meeting was to take place this morning, and that the intention was to march in open day light to attack this town, all the soldiers, as well as our own troon of Yeomanry, were under arms the whole of the tegl t. assure you our men waited with great impatience for the word—" to Horse?" At about six this morning, two of our special constable came at full speed, to inform us that they had seen large assemblage on Grange Moor. They supposed that'from to were well armed. were immediately called out, and sixteen our troop, with ten of the' Fourth Dragoon Guards, srert dispatched under a very gallant Commander, Major De Bath. We proceeded with all haste Grange-Moor, but to our utter chagrin, we found the cowardly villains fled. It is well ascertained, that when they learned that some gentlemen feone fetch the cavalry, they immediately began break their pikes, &c. pieces. They left muskets and :cr weapons, also one flag the field, which last we nave taken, with pikes and guns, to the number of nearly one hundred, and brought them in along wirh prisoners. I assure you we have had a morning's work, after being up all night, and setting off without any breakfast; but men more anxious to led the field were never beheld. "•< our return to Huddersfield, we found a reinforcement of about 800 of»the 6th regiment of foot from Halifax. These with our own military and the private individuals the ground, rent the air with acclamations. Every avenue our square was barricaded with waggons, <\c. We are to all appearance quiet the town, but not expect to remain so. The body of men from was headed by drums and fifes, and they expected that the numbers would be from five to ten thousand; but, to their surprise, they found none to meet them. Some of the prisoners have been examined, and their information, hope, will prove for the good of our country. had nearly forgot to say, that we all marched to With each a large pike, and our appearance was not much un'ike that of the Cossacks in Russia. Lieut. Shaw bore the green flag with a black fringe, which -we found the field, and it was inscribed the following motto :_" lie that so tit ii ,th tU turehj he. put death .<" All the shops, factories, banks, and every place connected with trade, were shut up, and business, of course, entirely sus. 