# Power Loom Riots, 1826

*Originally via Glenn Koppany.*

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001255/18260427/038/0003
Public Ledger and Daily Advertiser - Thursday 27 April 1826

RIOTS AT BLACKBURN

By the following letter received yesterday, from a highly respectable gentleman resident Blackburn, we are sorry to learn that want of labour, and the distress consequent thereon, have brought their usual concomitants:

"Blackburn, April 24.  
Sir, I have just time before the Post leaves to inform you our town was thrown into great confusion this afternoon by the arrival of some thousand persons from the adjacent districts, where they had been destroying all the power looms. Several hundreds of the mob were armed with pikes, a few with fire-arms, and nearly all the rest with bludgeons. They immediately proceeded to the works of Messrs, B. Eccles and Co. where they forced the doors, and before the soldiers had arrived had broken all the power looms, as well the implements connected with them; and although the spinning factory adjoins the premises, and some of the rooms occupied with spinning machinery, no attempt was made to destroy a single article connected with that department, not even the windows of the buildings. After this scene of mad devastation the mob immediately proceeded to the works of Mr. Hoghton, where they completely destroyed all the power loom machinery. The Riot Act was read three times, and the soldiers dispersed the mob, and received vollies of stones, which were thrown at them, with great forbearance. One fellow shot at a soldier, but the ball missed him, and entered the back of man standing near. Several persons were wounded, but I do not hear that any lives have been lost. A great number of the pikes, and other destructive weapons were taken from the mob by Mr. Rae the Constable, and the soldiers. Six of the most active leaders were seized, and taken before the Magistrates, and committed for further examination. Many additional Special Constables have been sworn in, and the streets are now, I am happy to say, perfectly quiet, but the soldiers remain under arms, ready at a moment's notice.

"The shops were instantly shut, but the rioters informed the shopkeepers they need not be apprehensive, as they would not harm them. In addition to the two mills mentioned, the mob destroyed the power looms, machinery, weft and twist, in use in the works of Messrs. Sykes, at Accrington; Messrs. Walmsley, at Rouf Hey; Mr. Bury, at White Ash; and other places are mentioned in the neighbourhood. I suppose the loss will amount to many thousand pounds, and I greatly fear it will not only throw those out of employ connected with the factories which have been destroyed, but that it will be the means of causing such a panic throughout the trade, as to prevent many thousands of the hand loom weavers from being re-engaged.

"The weavers labour under a delusion, by supposing the origin of their distress to be the use of machinery, and the destruction in the present instance of so much machinery, they conceive will prevent power loom weaving, and thereby remedy the evil, but they are mistaken, for it is more than probable, that it will tend to impoverish these districts, by driving the manufacturers to other parts, (as was the case some years ago with the spinners) where they can carry on their trade unmolested.

"I think that very few the mob belong to Blackburn. They came marching into the town with their glittering pikes shouldered, and the appearance generally was very alarming.

"The mob was so numerous, that it is impossible to form a correct idea as to the number.

"I am, Sir, your's &c., "O. S."


Reprinted in Oxford Journal - Saturday 29 April 1826 https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000073/18260429/004/0002 along with commentary from second edition

*From the Second Edition of the Manchester Mercury.*

Mercury Office, Tuesday morning.

We feel extreme regret in submitting to our readers the following detail which we have collected from various sources, with as much regard to accuracy as circumstances have rendered possible.

Yesterday forenoon a very large assembly of weavers took place on a hill at Henfield, a place where the four roads, leading to Blackburn, Burnley, Whalley, and Haslingden, meet. After remaining some time, a very large body proceeded to Accrington, the place where some indications of riot occurred this day week. Amongst the mob there assembled, there was a large body, not less, it is asserted, than 500, who were armed with pikes, or, to speak more correctly, knives and pieces of iron, ground sharp, and fastened at the end of sticks; some carried scythes, others had large sledge hammers, and a few had pistols and guns. The messenger who had been despatched to Blackburn for military aid had not returned, when, about twelve o'clock, the mob proceeded in a rapid but deliberate manner to Messrs. Sykes's new mill, which they immediately broke open, and in the course of fifteen or twenty minutes completely demolished the power-Iooms, sixty in number, with the dressing machines and other apparatus, and the warps and cloth in the looms. They likewise greatly injured the throstles and the steam-engine. The shops of the provision dealers were almost cleared of their contents. From this place they proceeded to a place called Wood Nook, where there were about twenty looms; these likewise they destroyed. They then went to Mr. Benjamin Warrmsley's at Rough Hey, where also they broke twenty looms, and did considerable other damage; they did not, however, do any wilful injury to thel spinning part of the machinery. From Rough Hey they proceeded to Mr. J. Bury's at White Ash, where they destroyed sixty or eighty looms. Such was the rapidityof their operatiops, that it was not until they had gone to this place, that the first account of the rioters having actually proceeded to violenes reached Blackburn. A party of the Queen's Bays immediately set out for White Ash, but the work of destruction had been completed before their arrival. A second demand for military aid had been sent from Accrington; the first, sent when no rioting had actually taken place, not having been attended to.At length 18 of the dragoons were dispatched, and on their way to Accrington they met and passed through a large body— the most moderate estimate we have heard says five or six thousand — of the rioters, who were then proceeding to Blackburn, having broken all the looms at White Ash. They did not, it is stated, appear to be at all intimidated by meeting the military, but carried their pikes, &c. openly, and in a very menacing manner. On entering Blackburn, a large number, from a body of 4 or 500, entered the Bay Horse Inn, a market-house, demanding bread and beer. The landlady, with some difficulty, got her doors closed, after having distributed a considerable quantity of liquor and all the bread she had in the house amongst those who had come in; they then rejoined their companions in the streets, and proceeded on without doing any further injury.

The next place which the mob visited was the extensive power loom factory of Messrs. Bannister, Eccles, and Co. in Durwen-street, Blackburn, where they arrived shortly after three o'clock. A party of dragoons was here as soon as themselves; but such species of force could be of little or no avail in checking their proceedings. They could not prevent them from entering the factory; and therefore, still less could they prevent the destruction of the obnoxious machinery it contained. Mr. Eccles, we understand, met them at the door of his mill, and endeavoured to prevent them from entering it, but a pike was immediately put to his breast. He was told that they did not wish to do him any harm, but the destruction of his looms they were determined on. It was at this place that the soldiers and the mob first came into collision. The former were most violently stoned by the latter, who were themselves screened from attack, and one soldier was considerably hurt. Some fire-arms also were discharged by the mob. In consequence, the Riot Act was read about half-past three o'clock; one or two soldiers, we believe, fired their pistols, and one of the rioters received a ball: and was slightly wounded in the back. The whole of Mr. Eccles's power looms and dressing machines were reduced to a complete wreck; the warps and cloth on the beams were also destroyed, but no injury was done to the spinning machinery. While the mob were at this place, our informant saw a poor fellow lie down before the feet of the soldiers' horses; he said that they might trample upon him if they liked; he was starving to death; but he would persist in breaking the power looms. Froma Messrs. Eccles and Co.'s the rioters proceeded to the mill belonging to Messrs. Fielden, Throp, and Townley, in King-street, which was intended to have contained power-looms; but none having yet been set up, they departed without committing any violence. A party, however, proceeded to Mr. Houghton's at Grimshaw Park (whither also some of the dragoons were detached), where there were about 25 looms. Notwithstanding the presence of the soldiers, they effected an entrance into the building, entirely destroyed the looms and threw the twist, the warps, and beams on which they were wound, into the canal. At this place also the soldiers were severely pelted with stones, and in some instances were fired on. A portion of them, consequently, dscharged their fire-arms, and one rioter in the building is stated to have been shot dead. Another man was shot through the ear, the ball coming out of his mouth, and another was so desperately shot in the back, there is said to be no chance of his recovery. Altogether it is supposed that two or three lives were lost, and four or five poor creatures very seriously or dangerously wounded.
  
The devastation at Mr. Houghton's terminated the lawless proceedings of the Rioters yesterday — terminated them, however, when not a single power-loom was left standing in Blackburn, or within six miles of it. A very large number of people, it is said not less than 10,000, kept parading the streets of Blackburn in the evening, and displayed so much excitation, that it was deemed necessary to read the Riot Act twice. About eight o'clock the dragoons were ordered to clear the streets, which they did, by striking with the flat edges of their swords; but in no instance, we believe, inflicting personal injury. Indeed, our information leads us to believe, that the coolness, temper, and humanity displayed by the military throughout the trying circumstances in which they were placed, were most exemplary.

LATER ACCOUNT.

(From a Second Edition of the *Manchester Journal* of Tuesday.)

Our fears as to the result of the meeting between Blackburn and Burnley have unfortunately been realized. Yesterday morning several thousand persons having collected at Henfield, they proceeded in a body to Messrs. Sykes's factory, at Accrington, where they demolished all the, steam-looms, and damaged the engine, and meeting with no opposition, they also carried the work of destruction into the factories of Mr. Walmesley, and Bury and Co. Our correspondent informs us, that their proceedings struck terror every where, as many of them were provided with fire-arms and pikes. On going into a factory, they first fired a pistol, and then gave three cheers, after which the demolition commenced, during which an armed guard marched round the place to prevent interruption. When they had finished the destruction of looms at Accrington, they proceeded towards Blackburn, and in passing over Standhill Moor, they marched in regular military order. In passing Foxhill Bank, a number of them stopped, and exacted bread and cheese from Mr. Simpson's family.

The mob arrived at Blackburn about six in the evening, and proceeded immediately to the factory of Messrs. Bannister, Eccles, and Co., where they demolished the looms in the most deliberate and systematic manner. A troop of thirty soldiers were called out, but there being no magistrate present till the destruction of the machinery was nearly completed, they were at a loss how to act. Indeed the force of the mob was so overpowering, and they showed so much regular discipline, that any attempt at force would only have exposed the soldiers to certain destruction. The officer on duty, who had often witnessed the disorderly tumult of an Irish mob, is said to have been much struck with the cool deliberate manner in which the rioters went about their unlawful purpose. Having, in about forty minutes, completely demolished the machinery, they proceeded towards Grimshaw-Park, levying contributions on the provision shops as they passed. Six men, who lingered behind in the factory, were taken into custody.

Amongst the factories which were expected to be attacked is that of Messrs. Garnett and Horsfall, at Clitheroe. These gentlemen have been for some time accumulating fire-arms, in order to be prepared for any attack; and we understand, that at a very early hour this morning a troop of horse marched from the barracks here to assist in protecting the factories at Clitheroe, so that there, it may be presumed, the rioters will meet with a check to their ill-directed violence.

The amount of damage done, we have heard stated, by a gentleman who is qualified to judge, is not less that 10,000*l.*


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18260506/009/0003
Leeds Mercury - Saturday 06 May 1826

RIOTS IN THE COUNTIES OF LANCASTER AND YORK.

In ia Second Edition of the *Leeds Mercury* of last week, we communicated, substantially. the following information, collected on the spot, relating to the extensive outrages which have prevailed, partly in the County of York, but principally in the neighbouring County of Lancaster, and which have agitated every part of the Kingdom. After the excesses which occurred in Blackburn and the nelghbourhood, on Monday the 25th and Tuesday the 26th ult. the rioters proceeded into the other parts of the hundred of Blackburn, and carried on their depredations in the power-loom factories In the whole line of country between Blackburn and Bury.

BLACKBURN AND BURY.

On Wednesday morning, a very large number of persons, chiefly from the neighbourhoods of Haslingdon and New-chureh, attacked the factory of Messrs. Thomas Whitehead and Brothers, at *Rawtenstall*, near Edenfield; where they destroyed all the power-looms, 96 in number. They then proceeded to Long Holme, where they destroyed 20 in the factory of Mr. Kay, and three in that of Mr. Hoyle. They afterwards went to the factory of Messrs. L. and J. Rostron, of Dearden-clough, where they broke 58 looms.

So far the rioters had proceeded us their lawless career, withsout opposition or interruption, but in their next enterprize, a different fate awaited them. Intelligence of the commencement of their proceedinsgs having been conveyed to the military who were guarding the extensive establishment of Messrs. Ashtorns of Ramsbottom, a party of about fourteen riflemen, and about the same number of dragoons, under the coommand of Col. Kearney and Major Eckersley, set out in search of them, accompanied by Wm. Grant, Esq. They proceeded to the factory of Mr. Alkin, of Chadderton, which was understood to be an object of attack; but, not finding the rioters there, set out in the direction in which they were unsderstood to be, and met then about a quarter of a mile from Mr. Alkins factory. The troops then formed across the road, and stopped the further progress of the rioters. Mr. Grant then read the riot act, and entreated the misguided men to return home: but they told him, without hesitation, that they would not return until they had destroyesd all the looms. As their progress along the road was stoppsed by the military, they got over the fences, and proceeded across the fields to Mr. Aiken's premises; whither, of course, the military and the magistrates returned, and arrived there about the same time as the mob. The military formed upon the road, close to the factory, round which the people assembled in very great numbers, and, in a few mninutes, began to pelt the soldiers with stones, which anere showered upon them from all sides, without intermission. At the same time, a number of the mob broke the windows at the back of the factory, got into it, and began to destroy the power-looms, Colonel Kearney, finding the lives of his men endangered, and being himself struck with a large stone, at length ordered the troops to fire, which they did, at first over the heads of the people, but, as that had no effect but to encourage them,— the riflemen began to take deadly aim; and several persons fell, some mortally wounded. The mob then gave way, and part of them were pursued by the military, whose attention was thus drarwn off from the premises; and no sooner were their backs turned, than the %vork of destruction recommenced, and the whole of the looms, 46 in number, were completely broken. The military then returned from the pursuit, and went back to the factory, where they made a number of prisoners, driving the mob entirely away from the premises, to the neigbouring hills. The military then returned to Ramsbottom, with their prisoners; and before they had reached that place, the rioters camne back to Mr. Aiken's premises, wehere they destroyed two dressing machines, which had previously escaped their notice.

The desperation and anxiety of the rioters was quite as conspicuous on this occasion, as at Blackburn. At the very time when the troops were firing incessantly upon them, many of them fearlessly entered the miii by the windows, to destroy the looms; whilst others defied the soldiers by all sorts of provoking expressions and gestures; some holding up handkerchiefs, and asking the riflemen to shoot at them, and many of them continued to throw stonesa without intermission. Of these, a number were picked out, and shot by the riflemen, amongst others, we believe, the man who hit Col. Kearney with a stone, was shot, at the same instant, by two balls, one of which passed through his body, and the other entered the back of his head. In the whole, considerably above 100 shots were fired; but by far the greater part of them over the heads of the people; for if the riflemen had taken deliberate aim at every shot, the slaughter would have been dreadful. As it was, the loss of life is sufficiently melancholy. The number who were killed on the spot, or died of their wounds within a few hours, is six, one of whom, we are sorry to say, is a woman. Their names are—
 
 TO DO
  RICIIARD LUND, isy trade a blacknsmirth, but who keistas asalal shasp at ?? shot thsrosgls tise betty. JAMiESa litTHtWELL., a weraver at l-ifelingdcn I larosagl else bsreast. JOHlN ASH-WORtTH, ea-weat-era Lt-aasliisgdcn; throusgh the bsody. JAMES LORD, a fullissg-rasiier at Netechuich; tisrsasg ts C budoty sand heais. .SAMES WiJATACRCE, deesser for Messrs. Restron's powser looms; thioasgl (lie bosty. MAlAR, SIMP'SON, wife oif - Simpson, a wveaver at i-aslingsien; shot thrtansis the left tilsigl.. Of these ussfocrtssate osen, Lusasa, Lord, and., Wisatacre, love left wrives esid fasnitiest the otiser tawo, wee believe, xere unsaacinsid. Lurtad, Ashtwortis, Raiis'i,h v ?? Iht)save- beent ?? neltive his lisa riot; but Wisatacrs, we believes, had no psarticiptationa in It wlsatev-er. lie itas been esmpltoyed. slesrisg tise mssrssisg, isa takissg the beams sist of tile looms of Isis emptloyers, befsaee taey swore isriskes lay Ctsc snath a asas, after tiseir dirsterstiota, isiconseiderately sveest edosen to wsitasess tite trasasacatosas ait Clhaslsertois, ashore tic mixecd witla the mulb, cissi xe-as treast usifortusnately shot lay osae of the rifomanc.- 1Vish regars ass the assmtnas sliso in kill ed, Ate saive heardsesa-ry sdifferenst Accouants; one rep-esenting her to have beets exteelney vislesit sasst atussi,,e to stie sitiitaarv, tanti she other statiosg that site Itias cattate to Ederalielsi, wills tile vicar of goisig to talsaishesser by ttse eoachts t asl, being too late ftcr It, seas statadisag on aI hilt At A shsart dlistaaca from ttac factosry, st-len site receivedi a sisot attics dtivistedthele fesataral artery asad sise bleato Cc i seams Of else osaseer tvasurdlra oat this occasion, it is impssateible t sea aask, asithi any Latic-ee of certasisay, Ass sonse of thlsncassrsae fesas distoast latacs, Anda terre carerieat acavy tby tiseir friesass. The aamlarer is stated Css be very considerable; bat sve isase onsly seasrs tlhe saasses of slat ; fosir of saloss are cdangserously svuneosehc. Asslosagat tse i; isosters taskenssi etahe. occasiosa, seas tse cosastalale of Etiesaielal, aehac, beisag alarmsedt for Isis sasfety, Tass Inito a psig-atle, wisirter tr teats followsedi Iy Cthe nilitary, said Appsrehsended. * YNcattithlslaaslditg lisa lost of lives, sassa the weouinds infalictes Ol as Iis occasion, tisc rioter., verre is ic sas aie inttlnidlatet ane deterresd frosm tieir pueriasse. After ttac sestessetiso of M~r. Aihkcat's lomnas, Lke. a tact of thsem isroceedtestso the factory of tilcoars. H-amaer ansti Sot, At Sosener- scat, ont CIs, roost to tisiy, NvtioaO thsey itroke sallth alsooass, 3i6 its sctan- her. They I seas wveat noi to Cise factory of tir. Jaistes Hucinas onaasas, ?? Wondti-l)lI, c~aise eloas to the towns of Bury, shelre tisey braske abitauit 511 loatus, os-t of 2555 witich the factory caataainrd]. infoarmatlion of tisrir parsacedlitgs isavisag litect irosoltly c-otveye toas Busy, as lartey iaf citle- mess iaats~latcil-y rivesss east, sacid Captasin Gotadfrali, at list hseadt sf Sti atest, rats at fish sitecdi to tise fiw-tiary, whiere tisey Arrived his Ciase Ct State the baith oaf tise loaoass, assi Co take 14I paistasers, several of weisa wisstrae atsirelsenseal in the fasctory. IThey stere all1, las ta-cit as these t~aken sit cttscilartcosa,l losigret its tite tassoss at Buary. Titay svece sass Fridaly brottught sapforeixatntna~ilon, whises three of titose ltasleos at Mile 5Hiuitc- hitsatas fassorv terre ronsaitteslof nsa ca rrge of hsigh trasatast is elarge, by ilse bys-, NV-latch, as taplaled to uhsi cater, tee do IsaaC exactlhy sonaslae- he'ast. We ?? ?? rotae frosts Ctarsceaa hct wve tiave asat Iarasat their saiastars. Ofr Cte cesiasincir, 25 titter buii isa-itt to basil catii ea targe' of riot, asad tartsl- er etatadaed for futraicr eaaaraiuaaatitt. A ertao=%er.~tqasest wst held oat) Fri !y, at Eatdssfsett, Iseforo M~r. Fee- Yassa, cats the hashes of' fit-c of lihe lacrtaios killedl at Clttaltertota oil weal- stttasy. otaly tat-s writsesics wvere cmuaisiied, saisat Stir isacqest teas Chris adjourniedat tt Cthe foletoaisag sday. A sejsaraat itatae~t is st lo Isata strvat Cilat b:aiti saf Jameoas Wsastatere, it beling supposed that the circumstances sf isle. deathe are di~shailess Cto those of the other pereoais-tt hats, seen re- postedtrat 5, ithe Jasry hadl cetsrnees a sveaditi of *t Wilful Murdter ogailtst rise tilitary ; but ace hove raut been able to leisas ?? liar stateasesit Is st-eli foundcedi. Ussly of tite Notice eirculasted lay the wraives-, fit the neigialbtur- iiaocl of Bliacklbuarn. 1W'e, the Weavers-sf os-er 1)arv'css, hsave taskets it intot vastaP- dereetadt eta 5sat It stssja C otrsutssstit bot~h fsr yotur goii stud tuiurs. -t hesesere ate tlinuk it oatr etuty, ssand it in as elteetticjl ate- Iidre, titit yott ?? deliver sauneso snor sark isuC, titter ithe Nt!)fs of Aprilt setea tat stop sill hiesists, anid to assist Isa tilt demlceoitions ?? ADDOINGidA a. Oss *s',eisnesdtav, tilsisut live ?? in tise afternofss, a mob, Consaistling ta frost festr to five ?? paeoplie, entered il te village of Addilusghtam, seined wcitis pistols, blisdgeoDSs, axes, Asnd etcher nfft'otst %yeapaoss, asnd prsceceted hit reguitar oirator Co tue pressases of Aite. cesensital Clorsfall, of sthe Loiw Mills, at tlsat placse. Severil of else rioters, whot appeared to taske n loeat its tue besatness, demanded. Admittance, for the CiAvowaed purpoasse of estesrsyisg tse paower.ioosne accompasytiag Cths dersans isetis ass isatisattoas ilsat, if their request seas ecomnplied wsici, sno violence weoulsi be safi-red so aisy of Sthe pennoies in Cthe tofu, bitt that, las cese any resistance teas oteres, they wvoasle oan effecting An entrance, throsw es-cry mass ocit sf ?? uper weindowes. Mr. Lwsswon. Cthe supecrintenadent of the mitt statead, thtet lie csueld nsot Accede to this realaest, bait Chat he st-s nittilsg to give thrin, a stilt of missay forte leir relief, aiddisag, that Stbe wosrlpclaoltl asere tvllacit aeri, saned acre detecasiseil to stefesd Cthe unill. 't he attslsaiats, uipao receivisag lhist answser, hlassaneiately comusenicedl their attack, (a pistol lasselg heesa flredt as a signil) by dtiscttargteg a volley oaf isege stosees through the windtows, setsircs saa retusrnesi by a disctiarga of the saise osisef cc frasa -wsithist; bit thilebeategesi fisndi thiagesi snoci of defrace fitlel]6inias, re- aorted to their flee arms, firing his ste first instsace, purrprsely.,oysr the heauds sif tlse asaailaatsa, but the attack beling tet-sisted hi, the- ocext ills. charge was tevelleit at tue rioters. Tite fielsag frost Sthe nail, id ?? sis' charge of stoasies from the ssailanets, confirmued ferar cousasidritle time. Tise rioters snertiog withs so formidable a reslstasice. ssosa reteatacd in their attack, auid when E. C. Lister, Esq. sif AMantinghnnm, wnio ihad been sent for, as the ien-a't m050i--,.,,trrivd, the mst atit ti-, si the rioters hots Metr~.Ar. Litter, upios Isis Arrival at the scese. of osc~tosc, toadi the riot net, and slur rcustrialdeesillperseal ?? further violesare, Tule lssjsry ditne to the niarlinery weas not material, but usbout gilt squares of glates In tuse winidowso of the mli were broken. Dusrisg Clue firing, whalels waos orsty taith shot, It is supposed that about tssenty persoass werq wousided, elevens of titers so severely tin to need surgical atteusndance at Adihingliatt, best we understotand that only One Pereon Is conside-red to belts danger. - None of M5r. Hoesfail's preotle recelvead any serious Issjury, except olue miuswhose hatd was umuch sliattered by tite burstiag of is biundlerbuss. The conduct of Mr. Lawson, who had the etitire directions of the defensive operations, was sucri usto do hian the highset credit, as he rmited tocsaurago great coolness anil humanity. Out Thuidday morsisag, a troop of the 1st Dragoon Guards roen the Leeds Barracks, arrived at Adtissgham. Durtag the greatest paet of the day, tihe hllas round Addingham were covered with people, to the number of several thousands, waiting for a favourable ?? for renewing the attack, but being apprised of the arrival of the military, they haltni council of war, and, after some eoaaustatlon, withdrew their forces. A detachment proceeded to Gargrave, for the purpose of destroying the power looms In Mr. 3tasons mil, and in their route passed througis Skipton, paradingsthe streets Is Military array I they arrived at Cargrave about eight o'clock. Mr. Na- eon, who had been informed of their approach, met them a short dis- tasuce from the tOWII, and esadeavouret to diss-sade them from their illietal tenlerprb , ?? them any relief which their nereusities naight req;ie ""u't other was rssJected, and tisey proceeded to Gargrave, sshere, .o about a quanter of an hour, thsey compleetyeleffecte4 the destruction of taes obragxlous looms, Y esterday, four mien, ehane e !t ith being ee(reiiletd in the nitttick ti upon Mr. H'orsfall'e mll, on Widnesday,. werq errans -ofr E.C Lister and Win. ithodes, Esqrs. twe, of the Magiatratni ~af the West-. Ridinlg, at Addingham. Jt appeared fron', the ex ?? of severn; `,fr witoiessee, that Edward Alarsh and Anthony Miller, both cottorn Wea- veen, of Addhiglhan, ssere present at the attack upon Mr. Horsfall's mill, and had taken an active part In It. The evidence against tlsd: ts other two persnost was extremely al ght. Afterant investigatione Wilkh bW I orcupied about two hours, Edward Marsh and Anthony M-Ifler were fully committed to York Castle, for trial at the next assizes, charged with unlawfully, riotously, and tumultuously assembling, and with having begun forcibly to demolish the mill of Mr. Horsfall. at The other two prisoners were ordered to be discharged. Two other men, sriuneri John Blannister and Witliait Hartley, both of Laneshaw-bridge, near Colne, were apprehended on Thursday evening, F and have been committed to York Castle. The troop of the First Dragoon Guards, which proceeded to Manchester yesterriay morning, have been replaced by a troop of the Fifth Dragoons from York. There is also a troop of the Yorkshire Hussaars, from Otley, which are likely to remain for some days. ci BACill, &-e. el After the fatal conflict at Ciradderton, one party of the rioters, as we have already stated, proceeded to Srommer-seat anti Bury at the same time another party returned towards Rtosetsicle, and re commenced thier operations at the factory of Messes. Ashworthr & Co. of HotMll(bu C a mile and a half from Rawtenstall, where they began in the morning). Here they broke twenty looms, and then proceeded to the factory of Messrs. John Ornmred and Sot,, at Writer Barn, where they broke about sixty, 'tien to Messes. tinegrenvees and Hardmansn, at ilacup, and destroyed sixteen; and then terminated their work of destruction by breaking fifty at the factory of Messrs. Muon, at Irwell Springs Throughout the whole of their ensirse, after leaving Chadderton, they experienced no obstructions or interruption, and if the m1ll-owners had trande the slightest preparation for the defence of their property. o Bstt whilst they were engaged in the destruction of Messrs. Mitnn', p) looms, many of them were observed by persons iviso were able ito Islet,. an tiffy them; and Mr. Wisitaker, a magistrate residing in thto neighbourhood of Bturnley iirsrom which islece Messrs. Muonns factory in distant a about five miles, took the most prompt and active measures to secure a tsern. A number of special constasbles were sworn in, warrants were immediately issued arnt the civil power, without any military assistance, succeeded in securing nine of the ringleaders, who were taken from their bedls drrvissg tre feliorviog night. Some apprelhensisirssbeing st entertiated of a rescue, a party of the lot Dragoons was despatched rit frorm Burnley, to guard the prisoners, Weho, on Thursday morning, were all committed to Lancaster for trial. They ?? sent, the same tiny, to the barracks at Birroley for safe custody, and, on the followlng Du morning, were forwarded to Lancaster. One of them is a wcorna Who re Is statedl in have been extremely active on the occasion. Several of the an mets are not wceasers. th on Sunday night, we believe, five toore of the rioters residling in the wI neighbourhood of Raseterrntall, were apprehended, and were on Monday committed to Lancaster. The effect of tlresr prompt and vigorous measures has been, we understand extremely salstrary, and the probability is, that the people lo, resisting in that neighbourhood will not readily embark ifi anje similar (tl lasvieas proceedings.

CHORLEY. *Shortly after noon on Thursday, a large mob mode tirelr.. appearance ete at erie of line factories belonging to Messrs. George end Robert Hilttorn, 051 of Chorley, where there were nearly a hundred tsl-au-looms. The prirs. en cpitlsl wvere not at home, hut the orcelosker ?? hart a fete minustes, ne notice of the approach of the rioters, loekerl tip the mill. When they al mtrre their appearance lire mosriterl ar, elevated situation, and addressed them, starting tlstt iris emplvrlsyr wvere gradually slopp~ing the lonams, as th thevwort fits them was finish ril, anrd did trot irrienri agairs to employ Y them , lire tiscrefore hopecd they woniri go saway an tioir no isnichief. A sur considerable posrtiorn seetred dlslsoerei so art on tisis advice; but several ce roagir fellows immediately said if the looms were riot lo be woocked again, so they might as well break them at any rate. The word was then given, ea rstsl instantly obeyed, to frirce the doors, at the same time a number of the mob told the onlookers they had come to break the looms, and that they would do r, but they would itale good care that no other irart Pa rf cthe machinery should be injured, tnyr so mins nas a wirodoso broken, or anti tins seas strictly adiseredr to, However, they set to at the looms, as niuny of tiser ans ?? rooin wcould hoird, wviti large serdge stakes, and hr wsiere these wossit nrit (io, they tore off rise beams ansi prizedl the tit oithen ports of the loom to ?? sitis tisem. Some trail large knives, tC scumil which tircy rut uip the yarn anti cloths on the looms, making, in short, a complete scene of devastation. One friios vies beginning to tear onave's gas-pipe. Tieoelocrgtioiio rts n al Dent vi splnl that gas-pipe-thsrt Io no lrrom, you are doing mischief einugir sv swlithout tiatit" Tire mats eltoed nit very deliberately, and said so ell C. tiren I weor't." Colonel Silvester, the roagistrate, attesrded tis neon as z possible, arrd reari the Riot Act amidst vollies of stonses flying in all. i slirectiorss, try wciicis several of the people belonging to the soul wcere S mursl irurt. It was at one time proposed to fasten the doors of the mill, he and attempt thur to sneure these icho 'erre in it, but this iriea, the op. preirension of their proceeding to destroy the other machinery caused ye tin be abandsoined. Tico troops of dragoons, whisti had been sent fire fe by express, left Biiarkbtrrr abzrut Isaif-prast tlrree o'clock, and perform cii tre ristatsrce to Chorley, 11 miles, In less than three quarters of nll 0l Isotic but the rioters had gone off about tretnoty roirutes before their en arrisol. h 

MANCHESTFR. April 20i. .-Yesterdiay, the town of Manchester, which had been free from any disturbance lit the early part of the week, began to asiuses t a reneacinrg appearance: groups of rsetr cisd boys began to collect in hi tire( neighbourhood of St. Georges Rows-, Great NoJwtori-Street, &c. asd Cr formene themselves ites, a iotly, fit ir fildir near St. George's Itoni, welere fo about tlet o'clock they ?? a sort of meeting. Tiroy were addressed as by a pterstit montited il ( ite soulsoiers of anotiser soon, tire brirtiren of wciose splech chiefly was, that they were peeces aslo and disponest to hence, but they watoied bread. After a short time they adjourned to nix octiri in the evening. In) ?? moano time, groups of disorderly persons were perambulating the neighbourhood, and from their liartgirge tV and bearing, it was consistently expected that mischief would be done at night. At the time, of their adjourned meeting there were collected together about 3000 people, cirietty boys, shouting sartl making a most trruttsrsotis noise. They were addressed by Mr. Prenrtie, of ture Manchester sirJefti', wvio reronstsrateri with trern ott thir hitopilicy of their a t liroccecrings, recommended patience to tterin, anti saul hint titere was ?? aI v-ry goeiteal and anxious dsicsre tlrrorgirout tlrs town ite alleviate Ot tireir distress, as far as possible, and that arsotirer subscription would be immediately entered lnoft r iis observations however, were Iscard 0 wcitir a great deal of impatience. Joriatiran liodgiris, lire joerneymars ti spinner, seho Iran ors several occasions evinced so much goon Rense, as also addressed them, and recommended that another petition should es ho sent rip to Parliament, praying ain instanrt revtiision of the Corn 0S I.nws. if ithit ws~s ttt ?? to, chiyrafoght go ?? ye- Or ronrsteate, but their rresetrt proceedings were totally crnsulted to obtain br ilseir cirrs. lie wnas frequentiy interrupted by cries of "' w~eve peti. Ort tioneri lorg eneisgl," &c. and one Iterson railed out "will you let rme a eat at yourr table till Ci trirsiwce comes ?? A cry of the constables having reached the grorirst, however, canecdl tre inch tso diecamp in all lit rlirectioissr oec parcty of 00 or ittO tisrk tirerireclion of Great Ancoats- Ccc street, and pretccesieli, ?? numbers increasing as they went along, towards Pollard-street. The mill of Mr. Kennedy having ceased working, they pilsser ?? withirat much notice, but stopped at the mill of Messrs. Joseph Clarke and Sons, in t'oliard-streei, and that of Messrs. fO T. and M. Ilarbottle, wichrel are sitar eacis other tre foriner conrtaisrrs power-looms for weaving fristiart, lans tgritnst ?? hostility seemed to be direceted, brit tire factter district and never slid. They broke si a tsnumier of windows tli it, birt son being told that there were 11??? power-looms there, they passed on to the mill of Messrs. Copley, as Batrrotw ann Co. which ire itelieve ices usroccsrlied r tirey, however, ei beroco some of tine wtainrosq, and tiren teveit on through New Islirgiorn, tl still Increasing in numbers, for the mill of Mr. Hugh Beaver, irr jersey- In street, Wehicir corrtains a conisidlerable number of power-looms, but en% whins, the proprietor not iravitg Iran arty ttiolirelnrsion that art attack iv, wourlri be simile spors it, wsr-i qirite ill-ait uriprotectetd statec. Tire mobh in Immediaceloey h-gait to. ternolisls the es-iniorc of the cousiting-hnimoe, "Ji atnd of the lowe'rr stories of the factory, thronagi wichrt ipiecea oif blnitrnig cottons were titrowct. Tire cousrtini-itlotv istri the first story were inatritnelately set lirt flormes, ?? comtunrricater rto(ire roth at iwere the grey genus weere Incpr, liefore the arricral of the engines. cc About tire caine tinrte, a large Iartcy ?? slircial catrstable.s, and sorte ar tif tire min itary arirvied, atn( cletrect the groundrilin front of lire mill. pr I'lic, engines laiitne-g a plentiful crrltly of wae~r-tecse l'actrsry.stsrrilurg be upnir ?? litik., rif the Rsoehltale, carsit, rand msot pact of it being L; 'fite-proruf--tlic flames riere sonor got unotie, orit by tlet o'clockt stere ir, lot-lip erntittgsisirei. It Is tundetrstoodl, that tite tiarage dorr it atMrl. h, Beaver's trill be f'rom tirree irs fourt tlorsasle poultris as, in 'adidition Li to tirelirtinjry rirtne to the birithrtlrg datir rarhineitry, tivitly twor tiros- ar outsit cettoir litres wcere riestroyeri. The fire weon chilefly coitfitied to cit le scarelisuse ptrct, atn (i nutrot extenri above the lower storry of rthe lit factory. Th'lis story coittairrei jinrer-loorns, hirtihl, irosier, inot tra- at, lug hi cr set lit wvork, sirstoirted little iirjrry. A Twresdsi of 20D3 iias Cr buello rrlfrerl for the conviction of any of the iricediarlirees. After crem- Si mitting several irther excesese oif mirror Imnportance, they isere at is, elength dlispiersed by a dilvisioir of the hoti Rifle Curtis, lriicesi iii rite eii Irictory of %Jr. Mottersiread, Irn Alit r's-lnrn1c, eV FRIDtAs', Ar'itti 2th.it T'iiss slay, a nistrbers of trle anrd dlisorderly persolls, chiefly Tlais, Tirirl i issetoibledil ii various parts rif the llireglboirlteor of St. George's road, fat atnd Atiriat's loire, Who Ijirrgitig by tinvir lanrguage,) teemed to regret sit theit thy naischitcf corstrimtter the night before tari riot been mites exten- mn sinre. Aibbtot twrelee o'clnock, it wsca srcongly reporteid, that attackes sceec dl tittinnt to be tinade stir the factories of filessrs. J, Claerke atnd urr, liii 0 Pollirness-strecc, Aneoat's-strcet, atir on otlier rcnraotfetorieo Iin the s neighbourhood. hoet tno ouch atrtacik wet moie. A nuriber of lawless fc fellowso dividiedi tiremselres iii grourps, end callerd at the different shirps arir private houses, on silicis thiey' ilevie cointribtionstliti i motley or' Isre. ilosior. Their object, however, seemed chiefly to be the former, and persons were pretty geeerahty induced, from ass ajrpreheasioit lest vita on lcisc might be committed, to comply wcits their demands Iir one ilit. tt starce, tisey Sai tfur eurlacity to stop a ortrge coach, anai deitesal, and obtain, money frorir the passergers. The contribution system lynn ex- Iit tendctd to the ftotsrrirps of Ardlviek and Cirorlton rowc, though, ire b?- dit herve, weith mnuds legs success titan in A'nocoat's-strect anid St. George's Ott roori, wleree it weas firstadiopteri I atnd by a little firmness ion liiit pinrt-of 4' the persple, and by the prepraration, wehiih teas pretty generally eloupted, of closing the doors and windows of shops, It u-as at lelgth~ put a stop to. IV The bustle and excitement of the period, however, vsras -lyskeriadvall. r tage of by thre professed thieies Wcho esarmin ?? e neighbouilioffd of St. it Geore' roosi antI for sme ?? in the-fr-noo ucla deetysrs. t ing attaclteit. The number and boldness of the robberies -ctimnsitted ti seem atre as Ir opien day light, and Itt tire centre of a large towns, we Bt never heard of before. Most of the actual disturbance in this town, during Friday, may, we believe, be fairly stated to have been the work of professional thieves. irou what we hnavso heard, of the persons who were aO I:npuidentl demanding money Il different parts of the tlwn tin and neighbourhood, we are conivnced that, generally speaking, they in were not inhabitants of Manchester. to The systemn of aussiel(us robbery to which have before adverted, to was cnrntirnled, so ldat It Was entirely unsafe for a WelI dresseri Persuon Ic to be seer, it that part of the torn, fumtil towards evening, seen the streets began to be considerably more crowded by persons who had been attracted to the spot by curiosity, after their days' work was over. At length, about six o'clock in the evening, the civil power, in considerable forcce, charged upon that part of the crode wI when the most mischief appeared to be going on, and for the smnoment se dispersed them. They were assailed, however, by vollies of stones, and soene of them rather severely injured, and it became quite rsamsifest to that they were not in strength available to clear the streets. In consequence, several of the magistrates, amongst whom were htesirse No rris, as Brierloy, and Foster, proceeded rnbaut seven o'clock, towards GreAt. in Amncoats street, where, in half an hour afterwards, the riot act was read by hir. iriarcey, altia nlarge placard, stating that it had been read, exihlbited. The cavalry therm scoured the streets, and the-.prutice made prisoners of those, to the number of twenty-four, whom they met with, and had reasons to think had been concerned in the roblerla which had taken place. After this the crowds did not attomnipt to reassemble and lip to a late hour, indqed until past midnight, every thing remained perfectly tranquil, As a measure of precaution, however, piquets of the Queen' Bays, were ordered to patrol the street during the night. A company of the Rocket Brigade reached Manchester on Friday forenoon, and the Cheshire Yeomanry, two hundred strong, arrived about half past two in the afternoon. The former, we are sorry to say, were severely pelted with stones in the neighbourhood of the New Cross. The police sent up to that place about the same time, for the purpose of attempting to take into custody some of the fellows who were levying contributions, but having iar military with him, M. Satuer had only six aristants, found impossible to interfere. o t THURSDAY, MiAY 4. . The disturbance??? in the neighbourhood of the New Cross are continued, inut net wint tha samue volene o as or-tnet preceding day. About C elevenr oitcit i party of the Cheshire Yeomanry, who went to patrol the . ft stifdt iv6 e a, severely plited wlth ston g, that, havingnmsmaglatrate e to emyw ettem to aet, theyy tlhouih It -Prudeat to retire¶ Xe. ILt short It A I D I D II 3 II k I I 1I 4 i I I It I Ii I .I I II I i I I I I I I I i i I I I I I I II I .I I I I ftie afterwards, Mr. Faost pr ibeec'did~ the top .,f Oldhantitel, accompanied by a body of special constables, sod read the Riot Act; - tbut he had scarcely concluded, iefitretleiest ibega to fly about so freely, that he and the constable thought most prudeni to hake ac -1 prceipitare rnireat. A dt nong body oi Yeomanry was afterwards despatched to the place: when the strietiw were cleared, and continued tolerabl free from interruption during the remainder of the day Ii but two of the Cheshire Yeomanry, who were sent with a ltesatch- ;l t-o Olilbettn, wer& eevereiy6pelteilh Oldhsm Roads and one of them c sees~th either knosliseil or uls~f irom lh-a borne, and very severely hurt. The prlendrer taken In the neighbourhood of the New Cross, on Friday E ails] Saturday, were brought isps for er sleetlon on Monday, when three men named Jrnrh Jeckaun, 'diasle Birkeshaw, and James, Surley, were committed to the Sessions for robbing Mr. Robert Thorpe.- Francis Gribben, John Turner, Edward Daviesi and Patrick Flinn, vwere u committed for three months as vagrants, for obtaining proviitdons andt money from shopkeepers by ?? were colm- E mitted to Lancaster for trial, on charges of throwing Stones at the nlll- I tary ; several othersecommittedl to the sessions, and a number were discharged. Since Saturday last there has been no actual rioting in Manchester, though the streets are much filled with people, and considerable excitation exists. Only one disturbance of any consequence has taken place since Saturday; this was on Tuesday night, when about two hundred persons proceeded to New Islington, and broke the windows of Messrs. Johnson & d Co.'s mill, and avowed a determination to destroy the power-looms it contains. They commenced their work with the endeavour to force a passage In with large stones, with which they broke the window-frames. However, a resolute watchman on the premises proved worthy of his trust; and, determined to defend his employer's property, he fired his blunderbuss, and hit one of the most forward of the assailants in the belly with a charge of swan shot. This dismayed the rioters, and they il retreated. The wounded man was carried to the Infirmary, where he still remalns in great danger of his life, which he has thrown away without the shadow of an excuse; for it seems he is not a weaver out of employ, but a cotton spinner, who either had or might have had work, and was resident in Lad-lane, at least two miles from the place where he provoked the evil which has fullen upon him. The Second Battallon of the Coldstream Regiment of Foot Guards, f and the f3d Regiment of Foot, are now on their way (per canal, night and day) to this town, where their arrival may be almost momentarlly expected. They will be quartered tls Lancashire till the really distressed rioters are convinced of the folly of their 1idt proceedings, and the wicked who have attempted to make profit of it, that the law is too strong for crime.

OLDHAM. b 2Vu7srsday, May 4.-At an early hour on Sunday morning. a large number of persons assembled on Tandle Hill, near Middleton. After remaining there until about ilne so'cock. they left the hill in a body, and proceeded to the mill of Mr. John Clegg, of High Crompton; where they demanded Admittance; and being refused, began to break the windows. The proprietor of the mill then opened the door for them; when they went in, and destroyed twenty-nine fustian-looms. A part of them then proceeded to the factory of Messrs. Ithine, Travis, and es Milne, at Shaw, but, fortunately, before their arrival, a few stout fellows, in Messrs. Milne & Co.'s employ, had assembled at the spot, and (though entirely unarmed) opposed their esitraiicere effectually; that i the rioters desisted from the attempt, and dispersed. ' C ' trillliuii6e'1af these pracanllhnga ?? heen conveyed t to Manchester, tih I1st Rocket Troop, and a squadron of Cheshire Yeomanry, set p osit immediately in search of the rioters: but, after pasalor through the country in which they had been carrying on their operations, and finding nothing, they returned to Manchester. About three o'clock on Monday, an alarm was brought to Oldham that another assembiage of persons had taken place upon T??ndle Hill; and that they had again moved towards the factory at Shaw. The Oldham Yeomamy Immediately turned out, and marched to Shaw: but, on their arrival there, they learned that the rioters had passed Shaw, and proceeded towards Greenacres Moor, where, together with many other persons, they had assembled round the factory of Messrs. Collings and Lancashire, but did not venture to make any attack upon it; knowing, probably, that the ?? had armed their work-people. On the arrival of the Yeomanry, the Rev. John Holme, who accompanied them, read the Riot Act, and the mob gradually dispersed, without having done any mischief. We believe that all the mitts coistaiing power-looms, in the neighbourhood of Oldham, are now put in a state of defence, so that if they should be attacked, the rioters will have reason to repent their temerity.

CLITHEROE.

*May 4*—There has been no attempt upon the Low Mills since the visit of the rioters from Colne and Burnley, on Monday and Tuesday week, These premises are now guarded by a company of the 60th Rifle Corps, a party of the 1st Dragoons from Leeds, and a strong body of zealous and well-armed workmen. Early on Saturday morning last, the 29th instant, in consequence of some misinformation, the alarm was given that a large body of people was approaching the mill, when the military immediately turned out, and the workmen rose from their beds, but after remaining under arms for some time, and patroling the roads in the neighbourhood, it was discovered that the alarm was unfounded.

The following caution has been issued to the inhabitants:-

"CAUTION—The Magistrates earnestly desire the Inhabitants of Clitheroe, in the event of a riot, or the assemblage of the mob, to keep themselves and families within their dwelling-houses, and their doors and shop windows closed.-*May 1*."

BOLTON.

*May 4*— Though there are a great number of power looms in this town, not the slightest disturnabce has taken place. Groups of people have collected in this town, as in all the manufacturing towns of the county, but the public peace has not been interrupted, though the local force of the place, the Bolton Yeomanry, have mustered and been under arms during the whole of the last and the present week.


PRIVATE tORRESPONDENCE. The following letters are from one of our correspondents it e who has passed during the present week, through the principall part of the disturbed districts of Yorkshire and Lancashire: SIcirTio, May 1. b t A confident expectation existed at Addioghalt, that an attack would t( h be made upon Air. linrsfall's mill to-day, and I was detained some hours n r at that place under the expectetisn of witnessing It. This attack hls tl s however riot been made, nor will it ever happen without a great effusion it e of blood, for the proprietor, whoshewedune thepreparations, hasseadered q I the mill almost impregnable, uetter the directiotc of CAPTAeN 11.0oncs, i the magistrate, itle of the Life Guards, who hak himself superintended d the derenee and directed the workmen. Thle two rioters, taken wilth arms in their hands, who wnere remanded, on Friday, underwent a final examination before Ellis Cunlifle Lister, Esq. sitd William Rliddes, Esq. on Saturday, and were ?? to York Castle for a misdemeanor n' only, It not appearing: tlast they were n I the if. ?? 0 both weavers, and live at Laneshnw-brldgeI' near 'olnc . Tbtir Et . names are Johin Bannister and William Hartley; The report that ti e a tailor was taken amongst the rioters, and committed to prison, is not  true, no person of that trade having been apprehended. A troop of the 16th Dragoons, and a small detachment of the Cravets Legion, at present H cotistitute the guard of the mill, with the aid of the workmen. From the best information I can collect, the immediate cause of the riot is the extreme low price paid for hand weaving, and the scarcity of work. The price paid to the weaver is such as will not sppport his family when he is in full work, without parish ahl. Colicocs, for which b: ,a Ss. a piece was paid for the weaving 21) years ago, are cetoe woven in somee it d districts, on theconflnesofYorkshire, at led. a piece and Is. is the waxi- w e 51,1c price at Addingham, and it this pltrt of the country. Meetings of st o a number of the principal manufacturers in Blackburn, Burnley, Colme; p and Todmorden, have been held to remonstrate on the subject of these extreme low meagre, and to establish an advanred rate of payment for at the weaving of calicoes, ans thley are supported by many of the cl bityers, but these laudable efforts have hitherto proved vain. This evil is aggravated by a difference of from 20 to 50 per cent in the wages paid for hand weaving goods of exactly the same description, pi wshich thro sv the trade into the hands of those who pay the lowest if t wages, and caol of course afford to sell at the lowest prices. in f BuRitevNY, May 2. im V A meeting of the Magistrates twus held here thI3 clay, its the afternoon, ti at which Sir John ltyng attended. The Magistrates present were, Law- It reuce Halsted, John Greenwood, antd Jatnes Whitaker, Esqrs. John gi and James Hargreaves, Esqrs. who usually attend at Burnley, behig sc preventted by a domestic illctiott-(the death of their brother) from 01 being present. At this meeting the following persons were committed to er : Lancaster Castle, charged with breaking into one of (he mills and destroying the machinery, namely, Thomas Ashworth, Citrter; James di Rostron atlt John Inglham, masons, of Lawetenstall; Alice Lord, Peggy cr Lord, Ann Ingham, and Johlt Ashworth, all of New Church. They ci are at present in coctlnemettt at thc Barrocit, aitd tsill be sent to tan- caster to-morrow unler a military escort of the First Dragcotts. The ar p principal subject cmder ?? at this meeting betweect the Geaeral fi att the hIagistrats3 weas, the best means tt be adopted cit this alarmilg w crisis, for the lt etectiot of property and the restoration of good order. a Sir John tytcg msstred the gentleineit presertt ctat tite. Govertinent b t were feclingly alive to the distress of the weavers atcd other ?? t c classes itt Lanicashire, tnd that they sere determited to afford theist every relief in their power, but that riot and Instubordclatlitl, as it b, woutl ecgtmetit the distress, nlttst be suppressear; and to effect this, they mV ?? irllnediiaely setd a competent military force itto all the manufacturing towvns; itt the mean time they had given orders, that the manufacturers solotiti be furnished with arms and ammunition, that they might be etableti to defend their own property. In the course of the day three pieces of artillery arrived at the Barracks; and a documentr fi teas isosted from this meeting of the nattire of a proclamation, with a view to be circulated through the disturbed districts, of which the following is a. . e S ?? Thie Magistrates deeply feelitg for the sufferings of the weavers and other labouring classes in this neighbourhood, have represented their wants to His Majesty'a government, and have every reason to believe, that their application will be attended to. They have also much gratifcation in being able to state from authority, that the distresses of the poor in this neighbourhood, it .have attracted the notice of many opulent and charitable individuals in London, who have signified their intention of opening a subscription for their support, unless prevented by continu- apice of their late riotous and disorderly conduct. ,: .- f The Magistrates do therefore hereby express a holte, that tr the fcsture cottluct of the mreavers fitd other lahourlng classes, P wvill be pettenble aitd orderly, acid tiot ccch as ro defeat the be- ) . ievsloitts itd chccritable initentlons of thcse, wvho are lioW coII- ilcg forvard to relieve their dtitresees. . The Magistrattes wish also to state, that the expenses tct- i . tending the destritetioti of the poitier loom machictery, do 'lot t fall upmts, the ?? only, but upon those from whom n the present support of thepoor is ctllected. tt < By Order of the Magistrates, Burnley, May 2, Il2i. SHAW AND ARtTINDALE. ci tBLAcriulN, Maly 3. ti lit the contitrv through whllch I have passed, I have itot seen any pi thing like cioting. A fet instuincesi have, however, toccurrecl, during ti itie present week, vib, at Bllrr'stwford, on the 1st instant, at nine o'clock iII in tle evenlig, a molt, conasiting of about two hundred persons, wentto the manufactory of Messrs. Grimnssaws and Bracmvetl, of that place, It: and told then, they were come for the purpose of breaking their power-looms. Mr. Grimshaw said, they had only two, and immedilately w fcirnisced them with a light, and stood by them while they performed rc 3 the operation. They then proceeded to Mr. Bolton's, of New Bridge, and made a similar declaration. -lere also there were only two looms, whichh were qilletly given up to destruction. .4 manufacturer in Cohae, who had two power-looms at work, yesterday ordered one of his own servants to break them in pieces, which he cheerfully did. In the whole line of country which I have passed through, since I left Skipton, there is an almost total absence of employment for the weavers, and the distress they are suffering is most appalling. The highways , warm with beggars, was accosted with heart-rending tales of woe by innumerable individuals, and even groups of mendicants, between Colne and Burnley. - You will be enabled to form a tolerable estimate of the state of the country, from the following facts:- al !t At Colue, ant the nelghbourhood. not more than one fourth of the cl usual quantity of goeds Is made, though the niuber of weavers is not w i diminishel. The overseers, however, allow Is. 6d. per head weekly, a to those who are out of employ, and to those who are partially employed, they make their earnings up to 15. Bd, per.weel, Insome of Et c tite neighstnurijng townships, they allow only,'is. per head. In Colne there are upwards of 1400 paupers,. and the relief paidllast month was y £420, besides articles of clothilrg. In the adjoining ttwnship of d Marsden, there are 2000 paupers. In some Instances the farmers pay more for poor rates than for rent, A farm at larroawford, which, before . the late war, let for £18 per annum, Is now. payicg at the rate of £50 n e per annum poor's rate. This last township has borrowed -X100to, on security of their lands, to enable them to keep them poor. The proximate cause of the present riotous proeeedingsa appears to be the rejection of their petitions for the repeal of the Corn Bill, in the present Sesslon of Parlianment. They waited and starved quietly and patiently, until the rejection of mtr. 'Whltmores motion for a revision of the Corn Laws, but as soon as they were apprised of that impolitic and unfortunate rejection, they determined to destroy the power looms, as the f e bldy ?? cearns of improving their own ?? is an b 1. Inotcvertiioes fart. t With f't berais ofet tranquility, some qmpt~ismoftba revival of trade ex,thlbttlsenseeavitn thtis laces 4(5,000 pice oiafhanid-wovecsslieoeabave ,n d nealmre work toehbe wesseen than, vsuaL. a Ia"al Patid anell', iok at Low Moor, near (Jlithero, are again 1 r -ncloathon, end. a ro of the gndtlDrageoons, or.Qusan'eDa thive left Clitherts Codt)'. Ar erived here, -on their. xetunqm a dhicter, having left osilys feof the let. Dragoons there, esa-fi w o tise Craven~ Legion. it -1s. impossible to state, the precise number it esideirassat atiy one plae~, As it varies every day.: .c. * The iconstahlesi At every place where there have been riotous proceed. 51 inge, are apprehending numbers of peoruo, male and female, who have been active in them. Three more, were committed from this. place yesterdny; making ten, in the whole, TIa. -Thomass L.eaits, William bi Suteliff, Sissean Wright, ThormpsDickinnon. James .ltling, Thomas' )I * Sharpies, James Shorrock, James -Latham, James- Ormeroxi, and r. *Richnird Kary. - Feour more were brought In for examinatioifi chailned y together twit and two, no I left the Megistrates !.roomn itt the Hotel. Thle attaick made last week on the ivorler of Banister Eccens and CO. of. 0 Chitl town, -took plane, and the clestruction wons nearly comp 'leted before ji the arrivel of ainy soldiers. The-property destroyed wan 212 -looms, tl eight dressing machines, one wiading machine, two loominitg frmms,. a n number of beam racks, andI a great quantity ef materials In. work. The' damage Sustained in tide manufactory atone is upwartts of £4000. One person *aso waunsled at these' works, viz. Thai. Hodson, cotton-sisplnef, ' of King-atreet, in Blasckburn, -who received a musittt ball in his thighi, It but is now In a state of convalesrenre. pt MAw;tssiTtSa,.4 4th. May.m I I Cahius metred from Stockport, where every tlting Is perfetly trtisapill, and not the slightest dlspositlon to riot hes been. reqnifested it its that place. A detachment of the Queen's Bays, a rifle Corps; end It some troops of the line, and also part of the Cheshire Yeomanary, are in Manchester at present, and more troops are expected here in the course of to-night or to-morrow morning. There have not been any outrages yesterday or to-day. -Parties of the military, nacasmpantiii by .1n constables, patrol the streets at night, and by Chat remus order IA preserved. To-slav, a large number of men employed in at power-loom factory of considerable extent, have refused roework any longer, unless they may be employed itoe -hole of the week. Instead of three days hi only, no htsa been Cthe case for same time. It Is reported'tltat a large. meeting Ia to-ha holden to-night, In St. Geocge's-flelds. 'IC at 'Serioas apprehensions have existed for the power-loom factories in the neighhourhood of ROCHDALE; but there has been no actssnl di:- W turisancee, though there Is reach public excitation in that piace. Almost at all the manusfactorleso in tse County obnoxious to the population have at been placed in a state of defence. At KRasiGLsY, the people of the laboutring classes were a great deal excited by the departure of the Yeomanry belonging to the Craven Legion, in enter spats their duty at Slg'itom;n sd some angry feeling ei displayed itself between the Yeomanry and the peopie, but the public vi pears was not in any material degree disturbed. Trhe Big, Bcns, a i species of recently introduced cositbiag snvolbine, used at DAsLslOsc sele out of favour, and sores threats have been made to destroy them, but the good sense and moderation of tue people will, it Is ihoped, 01 keep them f orn the commission of any such unavailing excess..- At el COmets, all IA perfectly trsnquil, though the public distress in that neighbourhood has nuot. we, fear, been in any degree diminished. ITuen public pies In the nelgthsinmolo~d oft TIL111As~i liss tnot' been dig turbad,_ e; end thotigh the rioters were so near, they have not extended their vs depredations, or even~ their visits, into the Vale of ToDNIsaDoNt. bt Number of Power Looms destroyed during the last week, its -the St factories of Is Mnesrsn. Sykes and Ca. ?? ai Mr' Waminisiy, Rough ?? dt Mr. Bury, White ?? 55 Messre. W. and R. Turner, Helm-rsh'o're ?? Ig5I Mr. Whitehead, 11awtonstall-.. ?? loi ' i Mr. Kays, Longholme ?? fleton and Sans, Edenilnid ?? too 5 Banister Eccles sand Co. ?? Ci Messrs. H-amer and -Son, ?? a5 Mr. Whitltisead, ?? II Messrs. Asitiortb, i-lol ?? 6 0 Messrs. llsrgreoveas ?? ?? 211 - Air. Munsi, ?? pI1 Messrs. Masson, Gsrgrave - ?? Itb Excluivise' of those siestroyed at the meills of Messrs. Atkin and Lordi, ii Chaddertats, anti Mr. Nasugiston, Grirnihaw Pock, the nusuber of whiich I is not statesi. The total number of looms destroyed may be estimates t at osse thousosid, and their value at £30,000. ?? ~a 

THE LAW WITH RESP1ECT TO RIOTING, &c.-In caqe- of any sudden riot or disturbance, any of his Maljesty's subjects may arm themselves and use ordinary means of force to suppress the same, without the presence of a magistrate or any other peace officer being necessary. The otiliforci are, (of course, included in the expression of "any of His Majesty's subjects." C The Yotrmsultn HusSAsts have been kept upon thse alert elate CtIte commencement of the alarming disturbances in, tue rolanufacttsring dlistricts. On tisa intelligence of the intended attack upon Mr. Horsfall's mill, at Adding. liom, being receivrdl, a detachtment of the Otley troop, under the command of Captain Leo, repaired Co Cite ssiall, a -sostn after midnight on Wedneesday, the 26th tilt, and in the fretntoot of Thursday, the remainder of Cite treap ivas sis. patlieti 'to the eases station. About twelve o'clock on Friday tihtti Ripon troop arrived in Otley, auth Cthe Hare. 5 wad roop, jondte bu or o'clock on Saturday tl monojitg. Suite that time, their Colonel Commandant, Lied r, Grantliam, lion arrived in Yorkashire from London, and the Hon. Edward Petre, and the Hon. Wm. Lascelies, buith mere-a bern of Isis corps,hleft London at the same time, to attend to their utihitnry duties. On Tuesday, vihe' Leeis seqtiadrer. It mrciscdlel frost hence to Bradfford ; andti te other troops of Cthe 'Yarksiire flutssairs a-re untler orsiers to Isold thterselves , in redisuitess, thoungh tisqir'saervices will now ocarcaly hae ye- S quiredh IC On Saturday evening a messenger was sent off with despatches to General Sir John Byng, to talie the military costs. mesuv of the Manchester district. MYSTEROtiS FIRE.-At an early hour oin Suteday I mornig the situp of III ;;0 . II. Horsfall. joiner and builder, a Ovfoirtl..rprI,. atichester, was bnrnt. dowjj-inanrvrcirrtion-- d that thisfire -had its origin-in the avession of workmen torma- chinery whaich they cansider calrstlatetl to abridge Cite demand ti for human labour. It epitears, that, some nstort time ago, Mr.- Horafali pssrchasetl a quantity of boaurts, sawn ait Mr. Bell- A house's ;Aw-mnili, which, at the time, wae no contrary to the wishes of his workmen that they refused to pile them up to fldry o sr, its ?? lasiguage, -to stsais' tisem and Mr. Horsfall wo ttnder tile neccessity of getting that oporatiusa' prfornmet F, by other Persons. Between eleven and twelve o'clock on So. y, tuisrlay, .a fire broheos~it in a stable adjoining -the work~sissp, t, ivhieh wsca subdued without lssving done much damage. - on searching the stable, several rolls of cotton rags, in a state of partial ignition, were -fouisit conlcaleth. In a chart time afterwards various fires broke out in differenut parts of Cite yitrd, and especially amongst the boards which we have already described, all of which snare traced to ainsilar rolls of rags. of ii whinrls no less than test or twvelve -wars foutnd in all. 1'hetCs D facto, of course, lert no doubL of an intention' to burn vise pro. 'n perty ; aitd Mr. Horsfall, apprehending a repetition of the attempt, determined to watch this prmi during the ensuing eight, lvhisir lie vituf, in company, inc believe, with his brother-in-law aisu Isis forenian. They remained on the promises tin- i til about four o'clock tits tiso morning, when Mr. Horsfall said, he thought that vise dasiger wits over, auth that they might safely go heattie bitt lie httis scarcely reiscied his house, when at person came to inform him that the work-shpp was on fire and C out reittrtiisg to it he found it completely in flames; and it wonsv entirely cansuistedi before utiey assistance could be obtained.- Frost this rircomstances which iappeties in tise niornitig no U douait cats exist that the fire was intentional). Who could save casiis(i it still remains a mystery; but, we belleve, some suspicions are entertainted on the subject. Two facts ore stated in the Mancsc/sees Jlferr~sy as amongst the stiperisnducing causes to tile isresent rutit)I fisot, that souse of the persosis whlo eniplo~y the hsand-ssl lit weavers, hsavc pisrried evilry compl~ait of reuluctioss of wages ?? and diminution of employment by ts thecaralioD, that it Was toII pe vrlsi" tdng ht sl as be ascribed solely to the roe~omadnta nes I these looms were 1tut down, the masters would be utiser the ti necessity of abaridoning their trade, tisid then wesrlcrien would II, be lert entirely wcithusit esnpluymeut :asd secones, titat for six tt wereks or vseo macriesa past, eneissaries, chiefly from a villapt w in Cthe neiglibourhlood of Bilackbturn, have been traveling about the country, representing to the weavers that till their visvreso c wvas owitig so the power-looms. and uraging tluani to rise stud destroy those maclines ; to wviich they said, tittt if they confined tueineelees, neither vime Governmesst nor the Magistrates would offer any resistance, but would, on the contrary, be exceedingly glad to witness their destruction. We have just heard that the petition to the House of Lords, presented on Monday night by lord Iinisg, from st Manchester, was drawn up and signed last Wednesday night, and lineseiatly otwruit o vse obe Lord, in order that it j, mi~lt ?? nevenoa declartion that a great number oif d, vis ivrieng lases n Mnniestr sid otimpute viseir suffer- Ingsto sut ue ofmaciiner, bu to iss olseration of the Is- 

STOCKPORT.-For several weeks the trade of this town lsas cotisisated gradually to become worse. in this 1triripl tatisfssursof he lec, ue are- so entirely de. J1 pesedtit n tia Manchester esirertat everv 5-arintion in A tha vaporvun ofniutiitevirss ue as its effect upon us. 'l'ie prspec befre u is loom inthe extreme. Hits. tR sires ofindviduls ac iandeisegabot vtse atrevet in idle. ti, ness, who iu fewv months ago were enjoying every comfort tint full employment could affords; the retail traders are completely at a stand, or are only receiving shillings where they used to receive pounds; and the owners of cottage property, many of whom are themselves labouring men, have the mortification to find that their investments, from which di in tise days of prosperity they anticipasted so much benefit, have become quite unproductive. In the neighbouring vilages the same scenes are witnessed, more especially in those - the inhabitants of which have been employed in hand-weaving. The scenes of individual distress which have been reported to us by eye-witnesses are of the most heart-rending description; and if some kind of relief be not afibtrdeh by those who have it in their power, there are many families in the town and neighbourhood who must absalutely perish for want. A puiblie subscription has been spoken of, and we ?? that this mode of relief must eventually be adopted. —*Stockport Advertiser*.

## And again in 1829

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000183/18290511/026/0004?browse=true
London Evening Standard - Monday 11 May 1829

TO DO - was this prompted as an anniversary? Are the similar things in 1827, 1828 etc

THE RIOTS

It is this week our painful duty to record a series of riotous and lawless proceedings which have taken place in this town and neighbourhood, by which public tranquillity has been interrupted, and property to a considerable amount wantonly destroyed. At Rochdale they have led to still more disastrous consequences. In that town several lives have been sacrificed, and a number of individuals have been more or less injured, in a criminal attempt to arrest the course of justice. Though wicked and designing men most probably have been the instigators of these outrages, the present circumstances of the working classes are but too well calculated to make them listen to any counsel which premises them an alleviation of their distress. And deeply as we may deprecate the unlawful proceedings wliich we have to detail, we cannot help making some allowance for men labouring under the extremes of want and wretchedness. Their hostility is directed chiefly against power-looms, to the cheaper productions of which they attribute the low rate of wages paid for hand-loom weaving. That the very general application of steam to weaving has materially contributed to diminish the value, and consequently to lower the price of hand-loom weaving, cannot be denied; for though the high price of power-cloth at one time allowed the manufacturers of inferior goods still to give their weavers a fair remuneration for their labour, the present price of the former is so low, that the manufacturers of hand-loom cloth have been compelled to reduce the wages of their weavers, until they are no longer equal to their subsistence. The great cause of the low rate of wages, however, is over-production. For many years past, even in the most prosperous times, the supply has exceeded the demand; and therefore the smallest diminution of the latter has occasioned an accumulation of stock, a consequent reduction of price, and this, as its consequence, a reduction of wages. Diminished wages compel the weaver to produce more goods, and diminished profits urge the manufacturer to make more. The principle upon which trade is now conducted is to make large returns for small profits, and it is perhaps of little consequence to the manufacturer if he clear a thousand pounds, whether he make it by the sale of five thousand pieces, or of fifty thousand; but it is of vast importance to the weaver whether, to earn ten shillings, he shall work for a week or a fortnight. The principle which regulates his master's transactions ought not to apply to him. Let him be ever so industrious, there is a limit to human exertion; and when we see a man make thirty yards of cloth in one day, and continue that labour six days in the week, we may fairly presume that we have seen the utmost effort of human labour at the loom. Then comes the question of remuneration. We are continually told that to meet the competition of other countries we must produce our goods on the very lowest terms. We much doubt, however, whether this continual reduction of wages, for the purpose of maintaining our superiority in foreign markets, has done much service to our foreign trade. It certainly has not diminished foreign competition, for that is daily increasing. Its only effect appears to have been to force the manufacturers of other countries to make corresponding reductions in the wages of their workmen, or to induce their governments to multiply restrictive duties. And what has been its effect upon our unfortunate weavers? It has reduced them to a state of actual starvation. In a late number we stated, on good authority, that there were numerous families whose earnings, by their labour, did net exceed 13d. per week for each individual; in the district in which Colne and Burnley are situated, it is estimated that there are 50,000 persons whose means of obtaining subsistence, including what they receive from their respective parishes, do not exceed ls. (id. per week. Such are the fruits of foreign competition! We do not mean to underrate the importance of a trade with other countries; but we conceive its value to depend upon the remuneration it yields to the merchant, the manufacturer, and the labourer. Now it appears, that though the value of the exports of British manufactures, has increased in official value, since 1820, in round numbers, from 38 to 52 millions, the real and declared value remains nearly the same! The exports of 1818 present a still more remarkable contrast with those of 1828, particularly in cotton manufactures. These, in the former year, amounted, according to official valuation, in round numbers, to rather more than twenty-two and a half millions, and according to their declared value, to upwards of eighteen and a half millions. Last year their official value amounted nearly to twenty-nine millions, while their real value had fallen to thirteen and a half millions! Thus, it appears that the more we extend our foreign trade, the less profitable it is to the country. We shall be told, probably, of changes in the value of the currency, and in the price of the raw material; but these circumstances will account only for a small portion of the difference in these returns. The altered circumstances of the labouring population is the best proof the fatal tendency of the practice of forcing a foreign trade. At the period with which we compare the present, the weavers were well paid. They had the means of obtaining all the necessaries, and most of the comforts of life. At the present moment they are suffering under the most distressing privations, not merely of the comforts and conveniences, but of the first necessaries of life.

## And again in 1838

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000083/18380106/008/0003
Manchester Times - Saturday 06 January 1838

RIOT OF THE POWER LOOM WEAVERS

TO DO

The public will be pretty generally aware, from the notices which have appeared in our columns at various times, that for some time past there has bean a turn-out of the weavers employed at the factory of Mr. Guest, at Holt Town, owing to an alleged reduction of prices. Numbers of his old hands have at various times assem. bled at his mill, to annoy and induce the workmen who had succeeded them in their situations to leave their employ also, but no disposition has, up to yesterday, been evinced to commit an open breach of the peace. Yesterday morning, however, a number of persons assembled in Manchester, and going to the factory of Mr. Jordan, at Knot Mill, induced the hands employed at nearly 500 looms to quit their work, for the purpose of joining them in procession to Holt Town. With this reinforcement, they proceeded through the town, calling at several of the mills for a similar purpose, but owing to the precautions taken by the millowners, who had received notice of their intention, they were in several instances defeated in their object. They were neesmarilv delayed bv these means in their march, and Mr.Thomas, deputy constable, having received information that it was their intention to destroy Mr. Guest's mill, immediately collected all the disposable force of the police-office, consisting of policemen Smith, M'Mullin, Kay, Norris, Pattinson, Irwin, Howarth, Wovenden, Lomas, Sickel, and Armitage, and dispatched them in advance of the procession to the mill in question, for its protection. this was about half-past eleven o'clock in the morning; and soon afterwards he called out three divisions of special constables, to aid themn, He then communicated with Colonel Wemyss and the magistrates, who believirg there was need for prompt assistance to support the civil force, a squadron of the 4th dragoons and several com. panies of infantry were called out, and also succeeded in arriving at Holt Town before the weavers. With such a force as this in view it might have been F-upposed that the individuals composing the procession, amounting to 600 of 700, would not have attempted any disturbance, hut on their arrival, however, acting under the direction of a man named Doyle, president of the Power Loom Weavers' Union, they took up a position immediatel in front of the mill. Here Doyle was busily marshaling them in order, when the police, seeing be was making himself Particularly active, immediately took him into custody. This was the signal for a shower of stones upon the officers, and Smith was struck by several of them, but not severely hurt. Policeman Oakes was also struck by a brickbat, The police, nothing daunted, faced their assailants, and rushing upon them in a body they gave way, and retired to some brick.kilns at a short distance roims the mill, in a field at Bewick. Two men named Thomas Andersons and Thomas Westlwed, and ia WIoman named Bridget MPatstliny, were subsequenty apprehended for having thrown stones. in the mes time Mr. Thomas, deputy-constable, followed the weavers into the field, and mounting one of the stacks of bricks at the kilus addressed the assemblRge, urgpg them by no means to suffer themselves to be incite o acts of violance. A number of voices shouted at once, "No we won't, Mr. Thomas, we don't want a disturbance; all we want is juatice." Mr. Thomas said he hoped such was the case, but reminded them how liable they were when assembled is such numbers, to be exeited to acts which, individually, they might not at first have intended. Not the slightest molestation was offered to him, the men gathering round him in good feeling, and cheering him. They were afterwards addressed to the same effect by Col. Wemyss. They remained there, however, during the day, and sent a deputation to Mr. Guest, requiring him to discharge one of his overlooeers named Smith, together with all his new hands, and stating that his old workmen would return'at an advance of one penny per cut on the prices he had given before. These terms were not accepted. All was peaceable during the remainder of the afternoon, however, but a fear existing that when the other mills loosed the hands would flock up to HoltTown, the militarv were kept under arms. This was not the case, and by ten o'clock last night most of the workmen had dispersed, and left the neighbourhood of the mill.

