# The Plug Drawer Riots

https://www.spenvalleycivicsociety.org.uk/spen-fame-trail/plug-rioters
Plug rioters

http://www.calderdalecompanion.co.uk/m408_p.html
Peel House Mill, Luddenden	Ref 15-P395
Worsted mill powered by Luddenden Brook.
In 1833, workers here were recorded as working a 78-hour week. Of 48 workers at the mill, 37 were children under the age of 16.

Owners and tenants have included
Robert Whitworth & Company [1795] until 1832 when they moved to Halifax
Ambler family of Midgley & Warley
Robert Ambler [1835]
John Ambler [1842]


TO DO

---
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002874/18420813/122/0008
Halifax Guardian - Saturday 13 August 1842

TO DO

LATEST PARTICULARS OF THE RIOTS IN LANCASHIRE. [FROM OUR OWN REPORTER.

The alarming intelligence of the outbreaks of large bodies of operatives in the cotton districts of Lancashire, was received in Halifax on Tuesday with consternation. Rumour with busy and exaggerating tongue magnified the extent of the outrages committed; and on the arrival of more authentic particulars, though it still left the issue in great uncertainty, we determined in order to ensure ucuu:‘ to have a reporter on the spot. His report, which begins with the proceedings of Wednesday and comes down to a late hour yesterday evening, is as follows : — MANCHESTER, WEDNESDAY, This morning at six o'clock, the rioters "commenced proceedings" by holding a meeting in Granby-row;irl'k. Mr. Dosle, a Chartist, was the main speaker; he advised the cperatives by all means to keep the peace, adding that, though he detested the Lv and abominated the lawemakers, he would obey the law until he had the power 1o destroy it and make good laws in its stead. M:Cartty, an operative from Liverjool, also addressed the meeting. He declared that the reduction of wages arose, not from the pressure of the times, but from the grinding and grasping avarice of the millowners At his suggestion the mob then marched through the streets of the town till twelve o'clock, turning out all the herds from every mill they passed, and even from the works of the Manchester and Sheflield pailway. "No one," said they, ""shall work till we get our rights." The crowd thus swelled from 5000 to about twice that number; and at every mill where submission was not instantly made to their demand it was enforced by breaking of windows, &c. At the mill of Messrs, Stirling and Beckton many windows were broken, and the dwelling-house of )i??r. Beckton was made a complete wreck; and it was not until the cavalry charged sword in hand that the mob was driven away. No serious consequences eusced, Messrs, hirlo-"- will, Oxford road, and Messrs, Kennedy's, in Ancontes street, being both defended by policemen, still continued to run. At the latter place a line of about 50 policemen was placed across the street, which led to a collision, but the arrival of a body of cavalry quieted the mob. Fifteen prisoners were taken at Messrs, Stirling and Beckton's; before that time twenty-seven had been captured; and the number was swelled to about sixty during the afternoon. About twelve o'clock the lock-up at Newtown was sacked and completely razed to the ground by a body of rioters. 1t was not a very strong place, having been formerly a dwellinghouse. Two prisoners having been taken to the Manchester gas works, at Newtown, the mob next went there, and rescued them from three policemen whom they ill-used. The timely arrival of a strong body of polices men and soldiers, however, prevented further mischief, as it was feared the noh intended taking up the mains, and so cutting-off part of the my;ry of ﬁ: to the town. The riot act was read (as it had near Messrs, Stirling and Beckton's) and the cavalry then galloped into the mob driving them back with drawn sabres; the police and riflemen keeping the ends of the streets so as to prevent the mob passing any way but one. Upwards of three hundred special constables were sworn-in during the day; and all the respectable inhabitants were requested to come funun protect the property and preserve the peace of the borough., Tt 5 - The cavalry in the town is the First Dragoons and the Rifles the 60th. At one o'clock the adjourned meeting of the mob was held in Graphy-row fields; but only about a thousand people assembled, "A fair day's wage for a fair day's work" was all the speakers advocated for; and the most determined resolution was manifested not to go in again till they got it. The meeting was again adjourned to six o'clock next morning. During the day it was said the mob intended to break-up the rails on the railways in order to prevent inter-communication; but no such attempt was made to-day; and in the evening all was quiet, probably owing to the damping influence of a rattling shower of rain, 

THURSDAY. There can be now no doubt but that this alarming outbreak, which is more to be dreaded than any former disturbance in this neighbourhood, has long premeditated. Between five and six this morning, the neighbourhood of Granby-row was crowded by the mal-contents, variously stated at from six to ten thousand. The Mayor, attended by other magistrates and police, succeeded in dispersing them, and informed them that meetings or assemblages of persons would not be allowed, 5 A About the same time a considerable mob set off to Eccles, stopping ali the mills, factories, and workshops in that mighlnmrtu-ml.-pwc«iim to the extensive works of Messes, Nasmythe, thence to the collieries of Lord Francis Egerton. This course has been followed by various detachments of the turp-outs,— going in different directions, — using violence where opposition was offered, and compelling all workpeople, without distinction -:‘pinn"-. calico printers, dyers, machine-makers, and others to join them. Three firms have successfully resisted : — Messrs, Birleys, Kennedys, and Pooleys. The former of these, whose mill is in Oxford-road, bas been, throughout the day, a scene of continued violence. To-day a policeman has been taken to the Police-office, mortally wounded. He endeavoured for a while to heat off the mob, but he was soon overmen d and his staff being token from him, it was rharously beat about his head and arms. Large masses have also moved along, demanding contributions at the houses, and helping themeelves to bread at the shops.

MEETING OF THE MILLOWNERS AND MERCHANTS AT THE TOWN HALL, AT 3 O'CLOCK. A large meeting of the merchants, mill-owners, &c., has just been held at the Town-hall, which was very respectably attended,— the mayor in the chair. He stated that he had called them together at this crisis to ask them to confer as to the best means to be adopted for the security of their property. He had no suggestion to make, but left it to themselves to consider what steps should be taken, The state of peril in which not only the mill property, but all descriptions of property, was placed, demanded the most vigilant attention from himself and the magistrates, for nar«l{ five minutes elapsed bes fore some new matter of vital importance came before them. He exhorted the mill-owners, there fore, to confer together, and communicate with the magistrates, who would aid than to every extent in their poner. Henry Honldsworih, Esq., expressed his gres alarm at the present state of the town. but thought that, if =~ an - OUNere &' ‘r Me' TTRuITay A pian of achion amongst the - d be generally acted upen, they -:{‘N " He recommended that they enee wom, *We are enlles, waking PUL & sop To The vy, ;hnu mngi arra A Ay eommence working o anoninl an-—- ° s for mutual assistance, mber of geuth wele uitim pointed to carey lb_; recommendation into A detachment of troops" has arrived at Liverpool: and the most effective mes been tod W he swe ¢ constal plely ape Heaven kuows :rodm i ave bee ~lay from sures have ~ Xt Tratures yand ba yand bave o red that they mav be driven . Tha A ation bee 

Oxford-road is the scen ne ore tust informed, th factories, collieries, &c., are all stop were *en route* for Worsley, Leigh, & stanter, Jiect the § el The shops were closed nearly the whole dr—«r-day, and business is completely at a stand still. The @ n is thickly placarded with large bills, warning FRIDAY flerent ) parties not t while the e * Operatives who @ 1 orderly. Yesterday from this town every mill Eood to leave their ¢ used. , and 1 helieve ters instantly comy ps in the stree ved Lills entoini 0 the town and ¥ v. No violent m the perer quest of the rioters, and permitted the pecy' employ to leave the factories quietly. ‘l S e I - eol e nee a serious accident was prevented by 4 THE HALIF gineer of the establishment. It appears that while one party, who are armed with hhj;:«n- and other weapons, are demanding that work should cease in, another rny either ruke out the fire of the boiler or turn off the water; in this instance the turn-outs, from the bungling and hasty manner in which they managed the business, Lad well nigh forced a bpiler full of hot water upon their comrades; the engineer, however, seeing the danger they were in, turned the proper tap, and the boiler was speedily emptied. The greatest alarm prevailed throughout the town, the beead-shops being assailed and emptied of their contents, Not the slightest resistance was made by the authorities; indeed it would have been madness to have done so, there being only a handful of soldiers in the town, and the police being miserably defective. The town this morning presents a most singular appearance. All the factories are at a stand; the huge chimneys vomit forth none of their accustomed smoke, and the day scoms more like & holiday, or Sunday, than any day else. This is the case also at Stockport, Oldham, acd indeed all the towns in this neighbourhood, Meetings of the various trades out of employ were held in various parts of Manchester early this morning: they one and all resolve most resolutely never to give in until lh{d.obuin their demands, and cause the masters to yie All the factories being at a complete stand, the various other trades are now turning out. ‘The joiners are a most formidable body, and are now plndi:: the streets, forcing every joiner they see at work to leave it instantly, I have just passed a large party of formidable looking fellows Yn Deansgate, who after a lengthened parley with a number of joiners, who were engaged 1 an unfinished building in the street, comy«‘-ﬁrd them st last to throw down their tools and join them. Not the slightest demonstration of feeling was made. 1 have also met, in my perambulations, large parties of excavators, and colliers, who I understand are pouring into the town in large numbers. A serious riot occurred this morning at the Adelphi Print Works, Salford, belonging to Mr. Wilson, I'he works were surrounded at an early hour by the turn-outs, who insisted upon the hands leaving their employ instantly. A powerful resistance was made by the men at work, some of whom were armed with muskets. The windows were speedily demolished, and the party inside fired upon the mob; several persons were nvenlL-wndl;. and a young man, who was shot in the lower part of the body, bas this moment been carried upon a litter past the window of the inn at which I am writing, to the Infirmary. He was followed by a group of women, who seemed to be uttering imprecations upon those by whose hands he had been wounded, e 3 About 11 o'clock a skirmish took place in the Market Place between the police and the mob. The former having fruitlessly ordered a large group of persons to disperse, made an attack upon them with their bludgeons; the mob made a short resi tance, but were ultimately dispersed. Several heads were dreadfully fractured. The police perambulate the town in bodies of about fifty each, ome-half being the regular force, the rest specials or pensioners, Over each detachment a serge.nt of the line (well-armed) is placed in command. The specials embrace the most respectable merchants, manufacturers, and shopkeepers; the Town Hall is the general rendezvous, where a party of riflemen and some dragoons are also stationed, with a posse of armed policemen ready to act at a moment's notice. A communication is kept up with the barracks, and the whole of the troops are under arms. The T.liccm noticed jmndl:y as having been dreadfully wounded, died during the night. About 11 o'clock this morning the military had one or cwo serious encounters with the turn-outs in Ancoats Road; they were obliged to charge on them twice, and such was the alarm otcuioms that the authorities at the Town Hall judged it advisable to issue orders to the shopkeepers throughout the town to close their shops immediately; the order was comp::‘ddtilh forthwith, and all the shops arc now ¢ b In Cannon-street the police succeeded in capturing 14 or 15 young men or lads who had formed a portion of a large party who were resolutely demanding the packers and warehousemen to leave their employ. All the dye houses in the neighbourhood are at a complete stand. If the rioters proceed as they have Som this morning, the only plan 1 can see is to put the town entirely under military law. Colonel Wemys is most indefatigable in his duties, and the military are patient and forbearing to a degree. e = I should have stated in a more early part of my communication, that the more vigorous measures which have been adopted in the borough, have been put in force by the county magistrates, The borough magistrates seem to have been remiss in their duties; my opinion is, that if they had adopted proper measures the emente might easily have been put down at the beginning. Bot 1T am afraid that many of the borough magistrates, by their indiscreet and violent language, when calling for a repeal of the corv-laws, have induced the present nwm state of things. The county lupim'ue- have been most active, and their advice is, that every master should swear in his servants as special constables in order to resist the demands which are becoming more common every hour, for money or bread. The gentlemen's houses in the vicinity of the town have been besieged by parties, numbering from a dozen to twenty each, whose demands they dare not resist. I fear that great excesses will be committed.

MOTTRAM, GLOSSOP, & TINTWISTLE. On Wednesday morning, a large hody of people, lmuminghm .Lmt two thousand men, left the neighbourhood of Ashton-under-Lyne, and proceeded by way of Mottram, Broadbottom, Dinting, Glossop, Tintwistle, &e. &e. turning out the hands at all the factories, printworks and other large establishments; but, we believe, without committing any outrages of a serious character, either upon persons or property, Whilst this was going on, another party from Ashton, Staley Bridge, and Dukinfield. went again to Hyde, occasionally levying contributions on the way, to satisfy themselves that the mills had not resumed working, A meeting had been held at Hyde, early that morning, which was addressed by one of the county magistrates, a member of the Anti-Corn-Law League, and his footman, in favour of the present project! Woodley was the next village, where the Apethorn Mills, after some trifling resistance by the engineer, surrendered, and Messrs, Heyworth's, of Cross Moor, followed in its turn Having effectually closed all the mills from Hyde to that place, thereby increasing their numbers as they proceeded to a formidable amount, the mob marched to Compstall Bridge, still armed with sticks, &c.; where the hands all came out; and, after some menacing expressions, obtained from Mr. George Andrew £3 and a barrel of ale. The latter they indignantly refused by Kicking in one of the ends, Several provision shops were entered. The mill and print-work« at Marple, Mellor-Moor, Disley, Hazel Grove, Chadkirk, Mottram, Broadbottom, Dinting, Glossop, Tintwistle, &c. were all turned out on \\'rdmnray. without committing any outrages of a serious character cither upod !n rons or property. The procession then returned to the neighbourhood of Hyde and Ashton early that niche.,

STOCKPORT & THE NEIGHBOURHOOD, (From the Stockport Advertiser of yesterday,) We regret to state, that this week has witnesd the commencement of a series of disturbance town and neighbourhood, which at every threatening appearance. and will 1 utmost firmness aJvhihmoa the part of the civi and military anthorities e*int uts was for As far as regards this town, it appears that formation of the ohj of the tu warded to Mr. Sl‘m'lbe sup police, on Supday, and ke > time 10 Clerk t nicating to the Mayor and T eulars of their meditared visit ‘lmu(‘ :_‘Nl Iﬁ'ci§| ay night; and other precauti takon, the s erintendent the mos ing his attention rof the main Lody, and comm the Vench Auesday, however, as far as Stockport was cerned, passed off peaceably, as did ‘\m t n anticipation of the following morning, application was made Colonel Wemyss at Manchester, for the assistance of a few of the military then at his control in town, (there being ou‘l‘twu companies of the foot in our barrucks) but they were refused. Mayor.and other magistrates repeated the nz tion with great earnestness, but with the lik cess, M= were then ched 1 fori Leatevat of thiecouns, e 0 1 Egerton, olonel Cheshire Yeor l-ra.h—lh-" ealling out of the Wis £ dac = nded to; for before two o'clock on Thurs ing, the Altrincham, Ducham Masser Tabley, and Stockport troops were in the town, ready to act in the Jre-erumn of the public peace, under the command of their Colonel. Meetings of the turn-outs were held early on Thursday morning at Ashton and Hyde. Those in the former :llCr we understand agreed not to carry into effect their contemplated march to Stockport, but to secure the possession of the railway, at Ach' ton, in order to Ym«u the transmission of troops to that place; whilst the men at Hyde determined to turn-out the workpeople of all the mills in Stockport. ~ This information mng been placed in the hands of the authorities, the special constables were in creased by several hundreds, and summoned to attend the Court Room, at ten o'clock, the mob - being expected between eleven and twelve. At 11 o'clock, the body from Hyde, consisting of several thousands of men, women, and lads, stopped at the Traveller's Call, liredl»ury, where they levied contributions of bread and cheese and ale. They were all armed with huge sticks. While they were at this place, William Booth, of this town, who was on horseback, joined the crowd, for information; but some of them kmwiniehim and suspecting his motives, pulled him off the horse and locked both him and the animal in the stable, where they left him. ‘l'h":{ reached Newbridge Lave about 12 o'clock, apd succeeded in driving the hands out of Mr. Jesse Howard's mill, the wob examining every room. Crossing the wooden bridge, they demanded i W of Messrs. Marshall's mill, which was i to without opposition, and the works were closed. The same at all other mills, the provision -h:r being entered on the way. Mr. Henry Marsland wished to address them, but they declined to hear him. Messrs. Bradshaw, of St. Peter's Gate, Heaton Norris, however, did not at first consent to turn out their workpeople. Three or four of the ringleaders of the mo!;oga\'ing rushed into the mill for the pnr:;»o of calling them out room by room, Mr. Bradshaw closed the front door upon them with the view of detaining than prisoners, A yell went through the crowd, the doors were burst open, their associates were released, and a number :?:'imlon were broken by the stones, one of which struck Mr. B. on the back. He then went to the door for the purpose of mwtntini with them, when he was assailed by vollies of sticks with such fury that, had it not been for the interference of one of the men, it would not be difficult to determine the result. The gates were thrown open, the hands came out, and the mob ceased throwing stones, About one o'clock in the afternoon, a large reinforcement from the neighbourhood, entered the town in & procession of ten a-breast; and being also pro\ id;xwith immense bludgeons. added to the hostility they exhibited towards the I\r«autimny remedies at hand, no less than their formidable character in numbers, gave the authorities some alarm. They accordingly collected all the special constables in the Court Room, protected by a guard of horse and foot soldiers, together with the police force and anxiliaries, all of wkom wore cutlasses; whilst the Magistrates and the rest of the military proceeded into the market place, where the Riot Act was read by the Mayor to the persons there assembled. Placards, *"the Riot Act has been read," were posted in different parts of the town, and the military were ordered to remain in Market-place, to be ready to act in case of emergency. Near two o'clock, information was furnished that a large body of the insurgents had forced an entrance into the New Poor Law Union Workhouse, Shaw Heath, and were disposing of the pread and other provisions amongst themselves; but many of them being unable to retire before the arrival of the military, they were made prisoners and are now under confinement there, the crowd still surrounding the Workhouse. The greater part of the crowd adjourned to the Waterloo Road, where a public meeting was held. The numbers have been variously estimated "at GOOO and 8000 of both sexes, The {Alguagc of the speakers was on the whole pacific; but earnestly recommended union for the increase of their wages, and a restoration to the scale paid in 1540, The meeting broke up about four o'clock, and the bulk of the turn-outs retired to the Market-place, in order to tantalize the yeomanry. All is quiet at the time we close this account (six o'clock, on Thursday night.)

LATEST PARTICULARS. MANCHESTER.—Five o'Clock, P.M, [FROM OUR OWN REPORTER.) A meeting of delegates was advertised to take place in the Carpenter's Hall at two o'clock, and mnlilf- of the varions trades who have turned out were also held in various parts of the town. There did not however appear to be one concentrated meeting and the consequence was the civil and military force was obliged to be divided into small sections in order the better to watch the movements of the turn-outs. ‘Temporary barracks are fitted ap in different parts of the town, sud from the excellency of the arrangements, no outbreak took place. Several depredations were committed in the neighbourhood, but before either the police or military could be seut for the parties managed to escape, 

TODMORDEN. According to my anticipation, Todmorden was visited early this morning by the turn-oats. One party came from Rochdale, Littleborough, and the neighbourhood; another came over the hills from Bacap. The latter was a most formidable looking force, being composed entirely of upgrown, determined looking men, who were all armed with thick hedge stakes. Some idea may be formed of the numbers of the mob, when it is stated that it took about twenty minutes for them to pass a given point. Messrs. Fielden's works were the first to be attacked. Not the slightest nrpo'ni-m was offered them by any of the firm, and I am told that one of the partners distributed money amongst them, add. ing also that they (Messrs. Fielden) were quite willing to accede to the proposal with respect to wages. Each mill was then visited in succession, the fire raked from beneath the boiler, the plugs knocked out, and the hands peremptorily ordered to quit the premises. At one place— Facit, near Whitworth, a gentleman of the latter name who occupied a will there, shewed some little resistance to the mob who had forced their way into the counting-house, upon which one of the turn-outs raising his bludgeon, struck Mr. W. such a blow as to break two of his fingers, at the same time telling him that if he dored to set his mill a-going before they told him, the next time they would burn it to the ground before his face. Similar threats to these were Lield out to all the millowners. The magistrates were on the alert at an early hour of the morning, and swore in about 200 special constables. A troop of the 11th Huossars (or Prince Albert''s own) also arrived about eleven o'clock from Burnley, and took up their quarters ina F'm of Messrs. Buckley's weaving shed. Several of the mill-owners were waited upon by the authorities, to know whether they desired protection. Mr. Fielden understand was first applied to; his answer was to the effect that Lo needed no protection, Ae dare trust himself, his mill, and Lis property. Some of the other mill owners at one time showed some sl ght resistance, but the peace of the neighbourhood is to be attributed o their wise resolution in yielding (however grating to their feelings) to the mob. As far as I can learn no injury or violence has been done. "The mob eutered all the shops at which eatables were sold, and in almost every instance brend and other articles were freely given them; the shopkeepers thanking their stars that they got off so easily. The public houses were crowded with these unusual visitors, who i general asked for a little of something to sup."" Heer was at once handed them, and in no instance that I can hear of was it drunk to excess, After the mills bad all been stopped, a public meeting of the torn-outs was held; several speakers from a distance addressed the meeting and urged n[:»u the turn-outs to keep the peace, to oiler violence to no man, to do no damage, and then they would gain their cause, One of the speakers said it was their determination to stop every mill where was an engine at work, and if after they were gone they learned that any of them had gone to their work again, they would pay them another visit. No one addressed the meeting who resided in Todmorden. The mob then left the town. The bellman announced that a public meeting wou!d be held on a vacant plot ngm.d on the Burpley read at six o'clock in the evening. The magistrates have adopted every prudential measure, but have not the remotest idea that an outbreak will take place, In all ttc movements of the turn-cuts, there appears the development of a deep-laid scheme. The Manchester turn-outs stopped the mills at Rochdale, and the Rochdale turn-outs were sent to Todmorden; great as were their numbers understand that the main body are proceeding through Rossendale o Burnley, where they purposed arriving to-night. Some portion of the turn-outs have declared their intention of marching to Hebden Bridge to-day. Whether or not these men are the mere puppets of the Anti-Corn Law League is a question I cannot @t ouce determine; but I think there is evidence sufficient to prove that the members of that association connive at what is doing. They seem to rejoice, rather than express regret, at what is doing, and when it is remembered that a month ago O'Connor stated upon the authority of the notorious Acland * that the factories were all to be stopped in one day," it does appear that this outbreak is the result of deep lnid design. It is certainly strange and betokens some ulterior object that the anti-corn law millowners of Staleybridge should have selected the very time for a decrease of wages when prices have been and are getting up. It has also been remarked that many Manchester members of the Lengue jeer and make merry at the respectable shopkeepers and others who have gulluur;come forward to protect it may be their property.

THE RIOTS IN LANCASHIRE. (From the City article of Thursday's Standard.) The disturbances amongst the workmen in Lancashire, originating in a question of wages, is principally absorbing attention this morning, and is throwing in the shade the interest usually felt in the incidents connected with the close of the session of parliament. The almost simultaneous movement, in point of time, amongst different classes of labourers and in different districts of the county, remote from ench other, are considered to be *prima facie* evidence of concert to an extent ealculated to give serious alarm for the consequences—not that there is any apprehension felt ltut the open disturbances will not be easily suppressed by the power of the government to coerce the people that are misled to obedience of the law. The fear arises from the J-mof such a state of things affords of the social disorganisation in the manufacturing districts, the result of a system rm'rcuively pressing down the mass of the people by the reduction of their wages, until they are rendered desperate and regardless of all consequences. It is further considered that an attempt to reduce wages at the present moment is in a peculiar degree injudicious, when, after a long period of detrenion, and with the prospect of an abundant nrvest, business is progressively reviving, from which causes the labouring classes have a right to look forward to an amelioration of their condition, It is yet farther a subject of regret that punishment will fall upon the comparatively innocent dupes of the more designing movers in the business, a result inevitable in all such cases, when every means are adopted to reach the primary guilty )nmieo. It has not escaped remark that the Manchester Guardian, the "most active organ of the anti-corn-law party in the north, endeavours to remove the blame from the millowners, and insinuates that the workmen at Ashton, where the turn-out in Lancashire originated, made n muere pretext of a pruguml to reduce their wages, that was not meant to be carried into effect. We are not at present in a condition to give either a pegative or an affirmative to that statement, but it hes not escaped observation that threats of stopping the milis have been repeatedly made by influential members of the Anti-Corn-law League, and it is considered possible that instead of doing so directly, recourse has been had to a reduction of wages, under circumstances which they must Lave known would be resisted, which would answer the purpose equally well, and at the same time apparently throw the whole onus on the recusants. The feeling therefore is, that the real state of the case should be probed to the bottom by the government with as little delay as possible, and if the strikes have been so iustimm-&‘ to disabuse the minds of the working classes relative to it before the delusion spreads further, Had it not [n-eu for these commotions the markets in all the manufacturing towns in the north were exhibiting more marked symptoms of improvement this week than they hnt} done for the last two years.


--
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002575/18420815/009/0001
Evening Star (London) - Monday 15 August 1842

RIOTS IN THE COUNTRY. MANCHESTER, SATURDAY EVENING. To-day the town has been tolerably quiet, but in a great many streets the shopkeepers have deemed it prudent to keep their shutters closed. In the morning the hands were turned out at several establishments where they had resumed work, by various bodies of the rioters, who managed to avoid coming in collision with the police or the special constables on any such occasion. A number of brickmakers who were at work in the neighbourhood of Ancoats were compelled to quit the yard. The bands in Messrs. Birley and Co.'s establishment have been at work during the day, under the protection of the police. Messrs: Kennedy's mill was stopped this morning in consequence of a deficiency of bobbins. No attack has been made or threatened by the rioters upon either of the above establishments to-day. Between 10 and 11 o'clock a large body of the rioters assembled near to the engine-house of the Manchester and Leeds Railway Company at Miles Platting, and threatened to pull the engine-house down if the hands employed there did not instantly leave. We have heard, from a respectable authority, that an individual amongst the rioters declared that there was 5/. for any man who would pull the first brick out of the works. On the appearance of the mob, information was sent to the Oldham-road police station, when Superintendent Stephenson and Inspector 11/'Knight, with a body of police constables, proceeded down the line as far as the engine-house. The mob, on getting sight of the police, began to file off in two divisions, but five men who had been the most active among them were captured and conveyed to the lock-up. The name of one of the prisoners is George Riley, a mechanic, No. 12, Reather-street. This fellow made himself very conspicuous in the crowd. He was taken by Inspector M`Knight. A company of the Rifles were afterwards appointed to protect the engine -house, and the workmen continued at their employment. About 12 o'clock a strong body of police, under the command of Mr. Sawley, went into Charles-street, and remained there a considerable time, in order to protect a number of men who were removing a heap of gravel from the street. The gravel had been left there by a contractor for the purpose of some improvements which are going on, and was the source from which the rioters obtained the stones thrown at the police the previous day. No resistance was made to the removal of the materials, with the exception of a few stones being thrown on the first appearance of the police. STOPPAGE OF WORKMEN. As early as half-past 7 in the morning a mob of the usual character made an onset on the bricklayers and labourers employed at the new buildings in Pool Fold :(the same as were attacked yesterday), and compelled them to cease work. We cannot help thinking, that had anything like a resistance been made, so as to gain time to send to the Townhall (only a few yards distant), most or all of the perpetrators of this impudent outrage might have been secured. Indeed, a detachment of the mounted patrol rode by not five minutes after. At other buildings in the town and neighbourhood, where masons or bricklayers are employed (including the new church in the Stretford-road), the same course of intimidation has been successfully practised. 

AND CONTINUES OVER SEVERAL COLUMNS

---
The Plug Rioters attacked the mill on 15th August 1842.


```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown

https://www.spen-valley.org/2019/09/13/whiff-of-revolution/

The Plug Riots of August 1842 were a protest about working conditions, food prices and lack of reform. The first attack in Cleckheaton targeted Anderton's factory at Providence Place. A mob attempted to draw the plug from the boiler,[to cut off the steam and shut down the mill], but they were beaten away. They met little resistance at Roundhill Mill, Gomersal. Five to six thousand men and women then assailed St. Peg Mill. Two of the three boiler plugs were drawn before special constables, a troop of lancers and a detachment of the Yorkshire Hussars arrived. Fighting broke out on a grand scale. The throng was dispersed without loss of life.
```

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000336/18420813/037/0008
Leeds Times - Saturday 13 August 1842

TO DO

RIOTS AND MOBS THE MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS. Most not all our readers are aware that the strict of the Staffordshire Potteries has recently fin disturbed state, occasioned by the colliers having turned out resistance further reduction wages. This dispute is by means LSSTs. many of the men resumed their labour faith their grievances being redressed. A number still remain "out," and parties These poor fellows have been commissioned the "committee," to solicit the contributions of the humane, to preserve their families from starvation. For this offence, Burslem, Mr. Rose, the stipendiary magistrate, has committed three of the men prison for month, as W™" * (!) Thi< was followed up on Saturday night last (the fifth instant), by the apprehension of three more men Burflem under circumstances of great provocation. The men had gone into the taproom of the George, a handsome commercial inn erected occupant, who made his property by keeping a public house, well frequented by this very class), and after being treated very roughly hv the Tory landlord, were banded over to the whom they were conveyed to the locku At the moment all passed off quietly, but at midnight about hundred of their companions marched in perfect silence to the place of confinement with their coaloicks their bands, and having broken open the doors of the place of confinement, liberated the whole of the men. They then proceeded to the George Inn noiselessly, and commenced an attack upon the splendid windows, which were few minutes reduced to perfect wreck. the same manner, they visited the house of the superintendent of the police, whose property was served in similar way, and then they went the houses those parties who had treated their companions intuit or unkindness during the day. A company of Rifles was instantly sent for from Newcastle, but by the time arrived, all was quiet, and the actors gone The affair has produced a great sensation; and it is hoped that it may lead men who are endeavouring to crush the people, to reflect on the consequences which their folly may provoke. The turn-out in South Staffordshire yet unsettled, and numbers have been added to the discontented. A great number meetings are to be held to-morrow various parts the district. The masters have, many places, drawn up their horses out of the pits, and are resolved to stand Bat against the repeated demands. The men are begging large parties various places. The colliers and miners in the neighbourhood of; Abervchan, North Wales, are still "out," and the works at a stand still. The colliers of the Pentwyn work 6 have returned to their labour. Considerable alarm was created on Tuesday week at Glasgow, consequence of a strike having taken place among the colliers and iron miners in the Airdale and Coatbridge district. the unemployed paraded the loads and villages armed with sticks, and created great terror. Ou Wednesday, meeting of 4000 miners took place, when a deputation was appointed to wait upon the masters, but no satisfactory conclusion was come to. The military from Edinburgh, Glasgow, and Stirling were called out, and ordered to the disturbed district. Thursday, about 8000 colliers assembled, and discussed plans for securing their claims. No disturbance took place, but the neighbourhood a state of great alarm. Several acts of depredation have been committed. Many potato fields have been plundered, and shops entered, and provision carts stopped, and their contents seized by the men. The sheriff has issued a proclamation warning the colliers, and stating that the law will enforced, and property protected.


DISTURBED STATE OF LANCASHIRE—! RISINGS AMONG THE OPERA S' IVES—LOSS LIFE, AND DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY. The manufacturing districts of Lancashire were state incipient rebellion at the beginning of this week. An organization seems to be on foot for general strike among the working classes all over the coancry. For long, such measure has been meditated" but now it seems fully resolved upon, with what results, time will show. bridge was the first district Lancashire to commence the war; where a threatened reduction of wages was seized on as the pretext for a general turn-out. During the late distressed state of trade, numerous notices of reduction of wages were made neighbourhood. The first of these notices was given a month ago, by Messrs. 6. Cheetham and Sons; and, expiration of the time, the weavers consented take the prices offered. Another notice was given Mesirs. Reyner and Brothers, about a after that Messrs. Cheetham; and a third, fortnight ago, Messrs. Wm. Bayley and Brothers. At the expiration of the notice given Messrs. Rayners, however, the weavers refused submit I to the reduction, and consequently left their employment. After they had been out for a day or two, Messrs. Rayners finding probably that the; market was improving, and that the proposed abatement was not likely to be submitted to. agreed to withdraw their notice, and their hands resumed their employment. hearing of this; result, Messrs. Cheetham's hands refused to continue their work the reduction; and, after a short delay, was agreed that the old rate should be restored. All these occurrences happened) prior Friday last, the notice given Messrs. and Brothers expired. We lielie it was the intention of that firm, after what had occurred to their neighbours, not to persist the notice they had given: but on Friday deputation of their weavers waited upon them, and, we believe, spoke very cavalierly on the subject of the proposed reduction; when one the partners observed, that, they took the matter up in that way, perhaps they had better play a few days, when they would probably think differently about it. As soon as the men heard this, without waiting for any formal answer to their application, they set up a shout, and the whole of the bands immediately left the mill for which, in fact, they appear to have merely wanted an excuse. Indeed,' arrangements for a general turn-out of the workpeople in the neighbourhood—in imitation of that which had been attempted in Staffordshire, and oi the Chartist schemes in the year 1839—had been previously discussed; and it was probably thought that the of reduction given by Messrs Bayley and Brothers would afford excellent pretext for carrying these plans into execution. On Saturday it was well known in the district that there was to be general turn-out of the Stalybridge spinners and weavers. i Monday morning the plans previously laid, began to rapidly developed. Messrs. Bayley's, spinners and weavers did not work; and, having been joined reinforcements from Ashton and the neighbourhood, consisting, not only of spinners and weavers, but of colliers, labourers, and workpeople of all descriptions, they went in succession to ail the Stalybridge, and insisted on the steam-engines being stopped, and the hands out of the mills. As is usual on such occasions, the mob were headed a number of big lads, who made a great noise. These were followed a few men and women, mixed mdi*-' criminate!}- together; and these succeeded the main body. Not access to the mills of Messrs. John and Jeremiah Lees soon as they expected, the mob set to work, and ripped the pianks out large doors. They also broke the lodge and windows. They got into the mill yard, and abused several of the hands, who, it appears, had been attempting to effect their escape another door. Messrs. Cheetham's hands, it appears, had not gone to their work at all, doubt knowing what was to happen, and: not choosing have the trouble of being turned out. Numerous other mills and works were visited in the same manner, the hands were all turned and the mob assumed a most formidable: appearance, numbering many thousands of workpeople. male and female. Not content with cansmo the factory peop'e turn out, they paid visits the collieries were work, and compelled co'.lieis join them. They also procured number formidable bludgeons from the yard* the various mills which they v sited, and were successful stopping nearly engine in the place. Proceeding from li.gl.er Dukiufield, they called at the print-works Messrs. Thomas and Sons, where they spoiled s work which was iv process. Thence they went :,) the r.iiil Messrs. Bini.s and I»ean, their demand the hands turned out was instantly complied with. They next went the Mr. Robinson, Mr. and Messrs. Robert Lets and Sons In the last instance, although the engines were stopped, and the hands turned out (which it was quite clear was not at all agreeable them), the mob were not permitted enter the mill. At small place to Bridge, the rioters drew the fire from under the steam-engine boiler, and thus put a Mop the operat of the various persons employed on the They next went into the town of Ashton, and, having assembled in the market-place, divided into two bodies; one of which, after visiting and stopping Messrs, and Son's mill, Hurst, went Oldham. The o:her party visited all the other mills in Ashtuii, some of violence two w them after which, proceeding through Denton and Crown Point, and baring forced journeyman hatter* join them, they went for. ward to Hyde; where they stopped the whole ol the factories. the evening, meeting was held at Ashton, and another yesterday morning, when Mr. George Southam, who happened to be pre. sent, was called to the chair. Several persons addressed the meeting; and, after resolution was passed insisting upon wages being advanced to the prices of the year 1840, it was determined to proceed body to Manchester.

THE RIOTS OF TUESDAY. On Tuesday morning, the turn-outs assembled at several points, and prepared to march in body upon Manchester. About ten o'clock in the forenoon, they reached Holt-town, to the number of about 5,000, where they succeeded in getting the hands employed in Mr. Guest's mill, leave off working. They then proceeded to Mr. George Clarke's mill, and threatened to break in the doors, if did not turn out his workpeople. He refused to do so, and they carried their threat into execution, and knocked down Air. Bryson Clarke. The hands of the New Brunswick Mill, Bradford road, belonging to Messsrs. Kelly and Gilmour, were next turned out; and the operatives employed at Mr. Guest's mill, Islington-street. Mr.Fairbairn's men were also obliged to leave their work about the same time. At half-past eleven o'clock, the mob entered the mill of Mr. Joynson, of Beswick, and forced him to turn out his work-people. When the procession arrived in Pollard-street, they were stopped by troop of cavalry, under the command of Colonel Wemyss, who was accompanied by Colonel Trevelyan, Sir Charles Shaw, D. Mande, Esq. and Colonel Hogg. A company of rifles was stationed in the rear of the cavalry. The whole the C division of police, under the superin tendjence of Mr. Cochrane, were also in attendance. The procession delayed here about half hour; and, perceiving that they could not force their way into town, some the committee had an interview with Mr. Maude and Colonel Wemvss, to whom they pledged themselves jthat they would not commit any breach of the peace. Mr. Maude advised them to disperse; and, in order to afford them an opportunity of doing so more readily, he withdrew the cavalry. The procession then broke up into several small bodies, some of whom went towards jPinmill Brow and others towards Travis Street. One detachment succeeded in tnrning out the hands from the factories of Messrs: Murray, and Mr. Hugh Beaver, Jersey street; Mr. Standring, Rhone street; and Mr. Smith, of St. George's Road. As was suspected that they intended to re-unite at Stevenson's Square, a detachment of police was stationed there to prevent them, and a portion of the cavalry were stationed 1 Piccadilly, to prevent them from getting into (Market Street. Finding that their way along Market Street was effectually kjpcked up by the military, the crowd remained in front of the Infirmary, for neatly half an hour. At last movement was made down Portland Street, (with view, it was said, to call upon the factory hands in Oxford Road and the surrounding district to leave work., sooner, however, was Col. Wemyss aware of the route they had taken, than he ordered the dragoons to {proceed down George Street, and through York Street, for the purpose of again breaking their line of march. This produced another interruption, but, after a few minutes' delay, the procession turned off to the left hand, wound its slow length along 31 inshull Street, and finally took its stand, without further molestation, on a piece of vacant 'ground near Granby Row. It was now about twelve o'clock; and, as the factory bells announced the dinner hour, some melancholy jokes were made on the subject by individuals in the crowd who seemed as if no bell had called them to inner for some time. Here a waggon was procured, from which several of the committee-men addressed the multitudes, and stated their object, which was a "fair day's work for fair day's wages."—The chairman, Mr. Pilling, an operative, stated that—"upwards of 20.000 men, women, and children, from Stalybridge, Dukinfield, Oldham, and the surrounding towns, had met that morning in Ashton-under-Lyne, and declared that they never would return to their work until the same prices were given them which they had had in the early part of 1840. They had turned out because some of their Corn Law repealing masters had lowered the wages of: spinners 25 percent. The wages of the power. loom had been dropped l§d to 2d, and in some instances as much Sd per cut; while the wages of spinners, card-room bands, and power-loom dressers, were reduced the same proportion. He had known several instances in which persons had dropped down and died from actual starvation. It was to remedy this state of things, that the operatives had turned out, and not for the advancement jof any political object."—Another speaker, Mr. Dixon, hoped the operatives would not allow themselves to starve, in order to amass splendid for. tunes for their employers. A certain party were no doubt well pleased with this "turn-out;" they thought they had accomplished their object, and that a certain state of things would soon he brought about, which was predicted by 3lr. Cob- I den in the Commons' House of Parliament. He had declared, that, unless the Corn Laws were repealed, would be impossible to keep the people quiet in manufacturing districts. He (Mr. Dixon) knew one man in Ashton who declared that he had reduced the prices for the purpose of arousing the people to state of frenzy. He knew that starvation had already entered their cottages, and he thought that if another reduction took place it would more than human patience could endure;. and that, the people were* once driven to acts of violence, it would induce Sir Robert Peel and his strong government to give the Anti-Corn Law |men their pet measure. He (Air. Dixon) hoped, however, that the operatives would not be made the tools of any party, but that they would struggle together for the obtainment of their just rights, He hoped they would not return to the mills, until the employers consented give them fair remuneration for their labour. It were much better for them to die on the highway, under the pure sun and pure atmosphere of heaven, than to die while pent up in a factory, and attending to the revolutions of machinery. were better to die on the street than die surrounded by the rattle-box, land thundering and clattering of the machinery of the capitalist.—Another speaker stated that the operatives of Preston had turned out since Thursday last, because a reduction cwt had taken place. In Bolton the bands had all turned out on Monday, and the 72nd regiment had to be called out to prevent a breach of the peace: three hundred and ten special constables were sworn in for the same purpose in Stalybridge. The meeting broke up about half-past one, when the Ashton and Stalybridge people again formed 'into procession, and proceeded quietly along Grandy Row, London Road, and the New Ashton Road, on their wav borne. They were escorted out of town by Mr. George Clarke and Mr. Maude, on horseback but none of the soldiers or police made their appearance. From careful estimate their numbers as they filed down Ashton Road, there appeared to be nearly persons from the country, majority whom were grown-up individuals. A considerable number the men and lads carried sticks. Shortly after the meeting, a crowd of persons went along Newton Lane in a tumultuous manner, demanding bread the various provision shops, Some of the shopkeepers, aware of their coming, had closed their shops but thought it most prudent, in some cases, to throw a loaf or out to the clamorous crowd. About the same time, crowd assembled in the front of two shops at the head of Travis street, Great Ancoats, the occupiers of which were also compelled to distribute bread gratuitously. At half-past two in the afternoon, a mob, consisting chiefly of women, attacked the mill of 'Messrs. Preston and Son, Ardwick Island, broke the windows, and damaged property to the amount At a quarter to three o'clock, the same party the dyeworks in Ancoats Vale, belonging to Messrs. Barlow and Sons. The damages will not exceed Kennedy's mill was also attacked by a mob, three hundred Isquares glass broken, and Mr. Kennedy, jun. assaulted.

FURTHER OUTRAGES.—A GIRL KILLED- Between three and four o'clock, large proceeded along Oxford-road, for the purpose of stopping Messrs. Bit"lev s mill, and that the Oxford-road Twist Company. arriving at the latter, they demanded that the hands should turned out Mr. Henry Cooke, one the partners, complied with their request, and immediately ordered the engines be stopped. Not content this, they demanded leave to enter the mill, in order that they might sure one remaining inside. refusal let them so, they instantly commenced the work of destruction by pieces the windows of the porter's lodge, at the ni.rth.east corner, and entered the mill yard. Fortunately, the military arrived at this juncture, and the only damage committed was flinging a skipful bobbins into the street. D. Maude, Esq. and Inspector Irwin arrived at the same time, and succeeded, with the assistance the police and military, apprehending the rioters. While the military were escorting the prisoners to the Town-Hall, the mob proceeded to Messrs. Biriey's mill, the windows of which they immediately commenced breaking. The inmates set to work force-pump, worked by the engine, throw water the crowd; but, this not proving! effectual defence, they resorted to more weapons. Several of them ascended to the roof, and flung down stones, pieces of iron, and other missiles, with such fatal effect, that several persons were hurt, and young girl, it is said, was killed on the spot. The ammunition of the mob paving been exhausted before they had broken all the windows, they seized cart loaded with coals, which was on its way to the factory, tilted it up, and employed the contents finishing the work of destruction. On the soldiers and police making their appearance, the mob dispersed; and Inspectors Irwin, M'Mullen, and Maybury apprehended eight men in the act breaking windows. Several other mills were attacked and damaged, and bread shops entered and plundered of their provisions.

THE RIOTS OF WEDNESDAY. On Wednesday morning, about six o'clock, upwards of two thousand persons assembled in Granby-row-fields, where they were addressed by several speakers, principally Chartists. The meeting broke about seven o'clock, the whole of the crowd amounting, by that time, to npwards of five thousand persons. Notice having arrived before they left the ground, that large mob had assembled near the factory of Messrs. Kennedy and Co.; without being able to prevail on them to stop, it was resolved to move off in that direction. In passing near the Manchester and Sheffield Railway, they forced the labourers, who were at work on the line, to throw down their tools and go along with them. "No one (they said), should work till they had got their rights." their wav to An coats-street, they sent a deputation to the factory of Messrs. Waterhouse and Thompson, Temple-street, demanding that the; hands should be turned out, which was done, and the greater number of them joined the crowd, On making the same demand at the factory of Messrs. Barnes, Jackson.street, refusal was given at first; but, on their commencing to break few windows, the engine was stopped amid the cheers of the mob. The next resting-place of the crowd, which had now swelled to nearly ten thousand persons, was in An coats-street, in the neighbourhood of Messrs. Kennedy's mill, which wss protected by Superintendent Cochrane and the C. division of police. Having placed fifty of the police across the street, in such manner as to prevent the passing and re-passing of any one, this led to collision between them and the mob; stones were thrown, and the police, who, however, kept their ground, succeeded in keeping back the crowd till party of cavalry arrived. Shortly . after eight, a considerable number of the mob dispersed in various directions to stop the mills and other public works in the different parts of the town. One of these divisions passed over Victoria.bridge at half-past eight, and proceeded along Greengate, Salford, ordering all the mills to turn-out: some of the masters complied with the request, and others kept them at work till later hour in the day. By nine o'clock, nearly all the factories and public works in the neighbourhoods of Oxford-road, London-road, and Ancoats, had turned out their hands. The manager of the Oxford-road Twist Company, among others, adopted this quiet method, and gave over about nine o'clock. Mr. Jones. Chester-street, also gave way like his neighbours. The cavalry having arrived, they endeavoured to disperse the rioters, who now became audacious, and therefore seemed disposed to resist for awhile bnt on the soldiers drawing their swords and dashing into the midst of them, they fled in all directions. The dragoons galloped along Bridgewater-street, and Albion-street, after the fugitives, and called upon all well-disposed persons i to go home, which few persons seemed inclined todo. Between 10 and 11 o'clock, a party appeared in front of Messrs. Sharp and Roberts's machine shop, Faulkner-street, and made the men turn out. They then went along Peter-street, stopping a factory in South-street as they passed. Numerous other mills were stopped, and thousands of bands thus thrown idle. The list of mills is long that we cannot give them.

DESTRUCTION OF THE NEWTOWN LOCK-UP, AND LIBERATION OF PRISONERS.

Information having reached the police-office that it was intended to demolish the lock-up at New. town, a strong body of police was promptly despatched thither, but before they could reach the place, distance of considerably more than mile from the police-office, the work of destruction had been completed. From what we can learn, the rioters commenced about quarter-past twelve o'clock, by throwing stones at the lock-up, which is a small building, formerly a dwelling, but . altered so as form a police station, where several men are generally duty. They soon forced a way into the premises, and very speedily demolished the furniture. They then tore down doors, window-frames, the beams of the roof, and in ten minutes the place was almost literally levelled with the ground. Shortly afterwards a report reached the policeoffice that the same body men intended to attack the Manchester Gas Works, at Newtown and about half-past twelve a strong body of the police was despatched thither. We understand that the gas works had becomean object attack from the circumstance that some of the rioters, who had been captured by the police, had been conveyed there I for safety; and toe mob expressed determination to rescue the prisoners. Since writing the above, we learn that the attack was made: the mob speedily forced open the doors of the gas-works, broke two or three windows, and did some other damage, but not any considerable extent. They found the two prisoners of whom they were in search, in the custody of three policemen. They beat the policeman severely, and rescued the prisoners. From an eye-witness who was on the spot shortly afterwards, we learn that about halfpast one o'clock there could not be fewer than 8.000 or 10,000 people in the neighbourhood the dragoons were galloping about, with drawn sabres, driving the people back; strong bodies of the police and the 60th Rifles were keeping the ends the streets in various directions, as to prevent the mob passing and this was the state of things j! in the streets for about half a mile round the gas works in all directions. Another report, brought to the police-office about the same time, was, that the rioters intended to visit the Liverpool and Manchester Railway (and probably others), with the object of tearing np the rails, and thus, they hoped, preventing any reinforcements of military reaching the town. About one o'clock, one of the mobs passing down Deansgate, came to the provision shop of Airs. Aldred, near the Castle Inn. The shopmen, on the alarm that the mob was coming, were engaged in putting up the shutters; but the mob speedily down again and rushed into the shop, where they took or had given them on their demand (we have not heard exactly which), between thirty and forty loaves. The mayor, and magistrates, together with Col. Wemyss, Sir Charles Shaw, and the town clerk and magistrate's clerk, were assembled all the forenoon in the boroughreeve's room at the Town Hall, adjoining the police office. At three o'clock, 300 special constables were sworn in, and gentlemen were thronging to the Town Hall for the purpose. Each special constable distinguished a white ribbon tied round arm above the elbow. A strong force the 60th Rifles, together with number of the police, have been drawn up the greater part of the day near the mill of Messrs. Murray. Great Ancoats-street. The other troops are the First Dragoons. They are kept constantly in readiness and two or three troops of them, will be seen above, have already been actively employed in driving back the crowds from their work of destruction and plunder. The riot act was read opposite Stirling and Becktons, Lower Mosley-street, by Daniel Maude, Esq., at an early hour on Wednesday morning. One of the borough magistrates also read the riot act in the neighbourhood of the gas works, at the attack there. Of the three Chartist petitions which have been presented to the House of Commons, and successively rejected, the first was signed by million 'and quarter, the second by two millions and a half, and the third by three millions and half. Private correspondence from Alexandria of the 23rd u!t., announces that the Egyptian fleet was about to sail for the purpose of exercise, and that levy of 60,000 men was being made, in order to recruit the regular army, which was reduced by disease to 12,000 men, who were in a miserable condition, being compelled to rob order to support themselves, not having received any pay for length of time. Public Dinner to Srarman Crawford, Esq., M.P., at Rochdale—On Tuesday evening last, there was supposed to be upwards of 10,000 persons assembled on an open space called 'the Butts, Rochdale. Mr. Thomas was appointed chairman, and introduced Mr. Sharman Crawford, the hon. member for that borough, who was received with cheers. Mr. Crawford cave lengthy account of his stewardship ai votes while the House of Commons, and said that at any time when a majority of a public meeting of the inhabitants of that borough wished him to resign his seat in Parliament would so, and he would give annually an account of his proceedings Parliament. The hon. member gave great satisfaction, and was {unanimously appointed for another year. On Wednesday, a public dinner was given Mr Crawford, at the Commercial Rooms, Tweedal's Hotel, when upwards of 200 of the electors dined with him. After the cloth was drawn, William Chadwick, Esq., magistrate, was appointed chairman. Mr. Crawford again gave an account of his votes, &c.- Speeches were made John Hright, William Barton, and several persons of Chartist principles, and all appeared highly satis, i fied with the conduct of Mr. Crawford as member of Parliament.

THE RISINGS AND RIOTS AT MANCHESTER. [FROM OUR OWN C Continued from our Seventh page). Manchester, Wednesday night, August 10. On Wednesday evening, the town still exhibited scenes of great commotion—tumultuous assemblages were gathered together in the disturbed districts. Divisions of the military and police, were stationed at various points, and general alarm was felt, lest the night should not pass over without the sacrifice of life or property. These fears were, happily, not realised. A severe thunder storm, accompanied with heavy rain, which came on, about seven o'clock in the evening, and continued during the night, effectually dispersed the riotous multitudes congregated in the streets. Some few of the more desperate, indeed, showed symptoms of a determination to weather it out, but being deserted the great bulk of their less ardent comrades, they also gradually retired, and the night passed over undisturbed. The only appearance of outrage occurred Salford, where a large quantity of timber was destroyed fire, in one of the timber yards of that place, but though amongst the crowds subsequently assembled in Manchester, expressions of exultation, in reference to this event, might be very frequently heard, the general opinion appears to be that the fire was attributable to accident and not to incendiarism—an opinion, which is confirmed in some measure, the fact that Salford, has up to this time, remained comparatively quiet. Thursday, August 11th. This morning, the proceedings of the turn-outs were renewed at an early hour. A meeting of operatives was convened at six o'clock, in the large open apace, palled Granby-Row-Fields, and half hour after time, a multitude of not less than 10,000 people'was assembled there. Immediate measures were adopted by the magistracy for dispersing the meeting, while Chartist called Christopher Doyle (who was member of the convention, and underwent a trial at Liverpool, for sedition,) was addressing the people, the Mayor, accompanied by General Warren, general commandant of the Northern District; one of the borough magistrates; Daniel Maude, Esq. stipendiary magistrate; and superintendent Beswick, of the police, approached the cart, which served a hustings, informed Mr. Doyle and the other leaders that the meeting was an illegal character; and then addressing the people, stated to them that the Riot Act would be read, and the military called in, unless they immediately dispersed. Some further conversation passed betwixt the authorities and the parties in the cart, and eventually, Mr. Doyle recommended the meeting to separate. The people nevertheless, stood their ground, and manifested no disposition to comply with this recommendation. few minutes, however, parties the First Boyal Dragoons entered upon the field from the various approaches, and were succeeded by body artillery, bringing with them two formidable looking Field Pieces. The appearance of the Canon had an instantaneous effect upon the alarmed multitude, who immediately scampered all directions, and in very short time the field was entirely cleared. In the early part the morning report reached the town, that a body of 12,00 colliers armed with were marching from Oldham to join the rioters in Manchester, and preparations were immediately made to repel the threatened invasion. A troop of Dragoons, and a number of Riflemen, together with a strong body of police, and another of special constables, were drawn up at the New Cross, where also the two field pieces, which bad previously done such effectual, though bloodless service, were placed under the superintendance of a number of the artillery, in such a position to command the approach from Oldham. The New Cress, where the civil and military forces were stationed, place where four roads meet, namely, the Oldham Road, Great Aucoates Street, Oldham Street, and Swan Street; the first named leading direct from Oldham, which is about seven miles distant, the second communicating with a dense population, comprising a large number of Irish people, the third leading directly into the heart of the town, and the fourth also, connected with a very populous district. From its forming the confluence so many important approaches, the New Cross has always been a kiuu focus for. rioters disturbed periods. The scene presented at this place was rather a striking one. The streets as far the eye could reach, every one of the four directions were lined with spectators; all the shops were dosed; the two field pieces presented their threatening orifices the Oldham Road; the Dragoons, Riflemen, and police, with weapons displayed, march and fro, keeping the people in continual motion, and separating them wherever they seemed to be gathering in knots and groups, by peremptory orders to "Move on." We are glad to say, however, that no necessity arose for calling the services of the military police into active requisition. The colliers having received intimation, that such forces awaited them, changed their plan of operations, and instead of entering Manchester, marched, it said, to Rochdale, where they caused the work people all the various establishments, to cease work and join them, the same manner as had been done Manchester. At the establishment of Messrs. Pilling and Bryall, cotton-spinners, Rochdale, not content with causing the work-people to turn out, they demanded interview with the proprietors, and this being refused, did soaie damage to the engine, but not to any serious extent Their numbers were now augmented the accession of the work-people from the various establishments to some thousands, and having stopped all the mills in Rochdale, they proseeded, we understand, to Hcywood and Middleton. where they carried their designs into effect with similar success. In Manchester, the rioters have remained scattered and dispersed during the day. very large or formidable assemblages have been made. Their immediate object, indeed, seems to have been accomplished, for every mill and factory in the town, has ceased to work. the principal disturbances during the day have been caused by mobs of 400 or people each, mainly composed of young men and women, who have visited the various provision shops the town, and demanded food and money, which almost every case have been given to them. We understand that there is scarcely a provisions shop in the town which has not been visited. Some of the mobs have also iv a similar manner obtained considerable quantities of liquor, from public houses and beer-shops many of which have been closed to avoid compliance with their demands, which are the most dangerous all, for should the recklessness of intoxication be added to the excitement which prevails, the most frightful consequences must ensue. An affray which terminated in serious injury to some of the police force, occurred betwixt one two o'clock to-day. Sergeant Dale, with about four other police ameers, and a considerable number of Chelsea pensioners, who had previously been sworn in special constables, were proceeding quietly up Oxford Road, when they suddenly came upon large assembly of the tarn-outs. The Chelsea pensioners immediately hang back, and though the police endeavoured to rally them, they actually took to their heels and ■Bade precipitate retreat, and the mob seeing only four or five policemen opposed to them, rushed furiously upon them, and compelled them seek refuge some of the neighbouring houses, where the women, whom they found within, very gallantly, but un-1 availiugiy, endeavoured to protect them locking them in rooms up stairs, but the mob burst open the doors, and unsparingly wreaked their vengeance upon them. Sergeant Dale was knocked down, and kicked and beaten till he lay insensible on the floor, and, not content with this, one of the rioters seized a poker and, 'him, he's not finished yet,' thrust the point into his neck with such force, to cause a wound of considerable depth and another policeman, named Bagnell, who, with two «, had taken refuge in another house, was treated in a dreadful manner. His skull was fracturcd, his back broken, and his whole body and face crushed and mutilated, that his companions could afterwards recr. „i i )im _ Xnev e rescued a large body the police. In a scuffle which endued afterwards in the same place, another, ?? policeman the name of Lee, was severely injured. All three are now in the Infirmary, and ?? are entertained of recovery. Some of the mill-owners appear to more particularly obnoxious to the turn-outs than the rest Amongst these are Messrs. Birley and Co. cotron •pinners, Oxford Road, and Stirling, cotton spinners. Lower Mosley Street. Messrs Kenraedy. Brothers, Pollard Street, and the Oxford Road Twist Company. Large mobs have attacked the mills those parties every day since the commencement the disturbances, and the windows are all Broken. At Messrs. Birley and Company's mills, number of riflemen are stationed, and policemen, with drawn cutlasses, protect the various apasmasfaes. Mr. Hugh Hornby Birley, the principal partner in the firm, more particularly obnoxious. because he was connected with the Peterloo affair. to this morning, they stopt the men wortrimt, but have since been obliged to cease doing so. Messrs. Charles and Alexander Harvey, of Green Hays, who were riding along Chorley Street day, were mistaken for the younger Birleys, and attacked the crowd, who knocked them off their horses, and severely beat one of them on the bead. They were obliged to take refuge in a neighbouring beer house, till they were rescued some the police. One of them was so much injured, as to render it necessary to take him to the Infirmary. The success which has hitherto attended the efforts of the turn-outs, may be inferred from the fact, that not a single mill or factory of any kind Manchester, is now at work. The whole Factory System has been brought to dead stand. No great damage, however, has been yet done to property, the millowners having, with a few exceptions, allowed their workpeople cease work, in compliance with the demands of the turn-outs. Where compliance bas been refused, the windows of the factories have been smashed in very summary manner, and a series of attacks and annoyances have been kept up, to which the most determined of the mill owners have been ultimately obliged to yield. Messrs. Birley and Co. were the last who kept their mills working. to three o'clock to-day, about 150 of the rioters had been taken prisoners and lodged in the New Bailey. About twenty-three men, have been received into the Infirmary, in consequence of wounds received in the various affrays which have taken place, but all these, with the exception of the policemen before named, and two other men, have since been enabled to leave that institution. The girl who was stated to . have been kil'ed, and whose name is Elizabeth Quiu, was only stunned, and is now recovering. The town is in state of extraordinary commotion. every baud the symptoms of alarm and confusion are visible. Vast numbers of men, women and children crowd the streets. All the shops, except those the centre of the town are closed; parties of military and police are seen marching and counter-marching in all directions; merchants, tradesmen, and shopkeepers of every grade, as well as the Chelsea pen. sioner's, are sworn in as special constables. The Borough magistrates sit all the day the Townhall; the walls are covered with placards calling upon the inhabitants to preserve order, and to avoid collecting groups. Meetings of masters and operatives are held almost hourly, and immense placards, "vociferous with capitals" stating that the Riot Act has been read, are to be seen every direction. At six o'clock this morning, a meeting of mechanics was held at the Carpenters'.hall, at which a long string of resolutions were passed, deprecating the late reduction in wages, but at the same time denouncing all attempts to break the law or injure person or property, and asserting that the working classes never will obtain their rights till the People's Charter become the law of the land; pledging the meeting cot to return to their work till deputations from the various trades had been consulted, and adjourning the meeting to two o'clock tomorrow. placard, headed Peace, Law, and Order,' has been issued, calling upon the various classes of operatives to meet at their respective localities, at six o'clock to-morrow morning, and to elect delegates to assemble in conference at ten o'clock tomorrow, to determine what further measures shall Ibe pursued. This is supposed to be for the purpose of organizing a resistance to simultaneous attempt which is to be made by the mill owners tomorrow to set their mills to work and employ their bands again, under the protection of the military and the police in accordance with a resolution agreed to at a meeting of the mill-owners, held to day. The dyers and various other classes of operatives, have also held meetings, and resolutions have been come to not to return to work, except at advanced wages. We have mingled with the groups, collected, in eager conversation, various parts of the town, and more particularly at the New Cross and in Oxford Road, and have observed that the expressions made use of, relate oftener to political grievances than to the ostensible object of the disturbance. the feeling, which has been so rapidly growing and strengthening of late years, and which has been so much fostered the Chartist agitation, of hatred to the masters and mill owners, seems to exist great intensity. Uuder surth circumstances, and with so many thousands of unemployed men, animated with vindictive feelings, it cannot be expected that life er property can long be protected from outrage and violence. The present species of neutrality cannot long exist The constant collision of such inflammable materials, must speedily be altogether checked, or result some fearful eruption. "Where will it end?" exclaimed one man in a to night; "In another Peterloo," was the immediate response. God forbid that this prediction should be verified but there are far unlikelier things. One of the most marked characteristics of the crowds in the streets is the fear of spies. If person respectably dressed, and these are very few, appear anion est them, and seems to listen to their conversation, suspicious glan. ces are fixed upon him immediately, or perhaps one them in a warning voice exclaims, "look out." One man walked up the street white blouse, and immediately a dozen voices exclaimed "policeman in disguise!" It is remarkable that towards a late hour of the night, when outrage might be most expected, the turn-outs invariably disperse and retire to their houses. This seems to be a good omen. So invariably has this been the case, that at night the military and the police are withdrawn from the streets the former, however, remain under arms, and the latter bivouac on the floor of the police office, under the Town Hall, be ready in case emergency. At present o'clock, p.m.) the town is perfectly quiet We hear that further troops are expected from Ireland. As we have stated before, General Warren, the General in command of the Northern district has arrived in the town. It has been stated in the town to-day, that disturbances commenced at Bolton this morning, and that ail the mills there have been stopped.

STOCKPORT. Thursday Evening. The disturbances have commenced at this place. It was expected that the turn-outs would visit the town on Tuesday, and 700 special constables were sworn in on Monday night. Tuesday and Wednesday, however, passed over peaceably. On the latter day application was made to Colonel Manchester, for the assistance a few of the military, (there being only two companies of the 79th Foot in the Stockport Barracks,) but they were refused. Before two o'clock, however, Thursday morning, application having been made the Lord Lieutenant for assistance, several troops of the Cheshire Yeomanry, under the command of their colonel, Wilbraha'm Egerton, Esq., were in the town, ready to act for the preservation the peace. The town became much excited shops were closed—business entirely suspended—and some of the mills ceasing working at breakfast time, occasioned more than ordinary tumult in the streets. At eleven o'clock on Thursday morning, a large turn-outs, consisting of several thousands of men, women, and lads, were on their way from Hyde to Stockport all armed with huge sticks. At the .Traveller's Call, Bradbury, they levied contributions of bread, cheese, and ale, and while here, William Booth, of Stockport, happening to come amongst them on horseback, was immediately suspected being a spy, and very summarily dragged off his hors*, and both himself and the animal were locked in the stable and left there. they proceeded, they turned out all the hands the numerous mills, factories, hat-shops, and calico-printers, bleachers, &c. the vicinity their line march. some the mills the hands had already quitted their work on hearing their approach*, and in the township of Norris, all the mills at once surrendered unconditionally, except two instances, where they put out the engine fires. Messrs. {of St. Peter's gates, however, did not at first consent to turn out their workpeople. Three four of the ringleaders of the mob having rushed into the mill for the purpose of calling them out l room room, Mr. Bradshaw closed the front door upon them with a view detaining them as prisoners. yell went through the crowd, the doors were burst open, their associates were released, and a number of windows were broken one which struck Mr. B. on the back. then went to the dour for the purpose of remonstrating with them, when he was assailed ' volleys sticks with such fury, that had it not been for one of the men his life would most likely have been sacrificed. The gates were thrown open, the hands came out, and the mob ceased throwing stones. We understand that information of the attack upon the factory was despatched to the authorities at the Court-room, but the required assistance was not furnished. The people were otherwise peaceable. About one o'clock a large reinforcement from the neighbourhood (according to arrangement) entered the town in procession, ten a-breast, and provided with immense bludgeons. All the special constables were immediately assembled in the Court-room, protected guard horse and foot soldiers, together with the police force, and auxiliary all of whom wore cutlasses, whilst the magistrates and the rest of the military, proceeded into the Market-place, where the Riot Act was read by the Mayor. Near two o'clock, information was furnished that a large body of the insurgents had forced entrance into the new poor law union workhouse. New Heath, and were disposing of the bread and other provisions amongst themselves; hut the military arriving before they were all able retire, a considerable number were made prisoners, and are now confined there, the mob still surround, ing the workhouse. A public meeting was held Waterloo-road, at which from 6000 to persons both sexes were present. The language of the speakers was pacific; but they earnestly recommended union for the increase wages, and a restoration the scale paid in 1840. The meeting broke about four o'clock, and the bulk of the turn-outs retired to the Marketplace in order to tantalize the yeomanry. All was quiet six o'clock.

MANCHESTER. Friday morning. Manchester still continues very disturbed state. All the mills, with the exception of Messrs. Birley and Co.'s continues standing. Bands of the turn-outs, in considerable numbers, visited all the various works (such as Dyeworlu, timber yards, &c, &c.,) early this morning, and caused the men all these establishments to turn out. It is still announced that the colliers for Oldham intend to March upon the town. About half-past six o'clock in the morning, party of several hundreds the turn-outs visited the Silk Mill of Messrs. IH. and E. Tootal, Silver Street, and caused all the hands to turn out. The same body afterwards 'proceeded to Bank Top, where they had heard that a mill was at work. Other parties perambulated the streets for similar purposes. have heard, from enquiry at the Town Hal! this morning, that several measures are likely to be adopted against the turn-outs to-day, if the disturbances continue, Manchester, Friday, 3 o'clock. The turn-outs are still as firm and unyielding as ever. There are symptoms whatever the disturbances subsiding or being quelled. violence is resorted to, and damage done to property when the mobs are not opposed. Their sole object seems to be to prevent the mills from working—to have, in fact, sort of sacred week, such as was contemplated by the Chartists some time ago. After the visit of the mob to Messrs. silk-mill, Silver-street, which has been before mentioned, they visited the lead-works of Mr. Hockleshaw, near Piccadilly, and having turned out the workmen, were about to march away, when a body of police, with Superintendent Saw ley at their head, came up, and eleven lads who had been left in the mill were taken into custody. There are now about 200 prisoners in ens. tody. The police have never had their clothes off since Monday. An impression seems to gaining ground both amongst the military and the police, and also amongst the people themselves, that the present disturbances will not terminate without extensive bloodshed. The number of people who have now ceased working so immense, that it seems almost impossible to devise any plan for getting them quietly to the mills again. There appears to be some secret organisation amongst them, and so well is the secret kept, that the police can never tell where an outbreak will next take place. Various meetings of the associations have been held during the day, at which the same determined, though peaceable tone has been held, as at the previous meetings. In all the disturbed districts, the turn-outs con. tinued vigorous and unsubdued as ever. In Oldham, Rochdale, Ashton, Stalybridge, and other places, not a mill is working. Lord Francis Egerton's colliers have turned out, and are now surrounding the park Sir Thomas Trafford, about two miles and a half from Manchaster.

SALFORD. The turn-outs assembled in thousands in Salford this morning, armed with bludgeons, and immediately proceeded to stop the mills. At Messrs. Wilson's print mills, the men were not allowed to turn out, and the mob assuming threatening appearance, a private watchman on the premises discharged gun, loaded with small shot, at them, 'and wounded five persons. None of them were dangerously wounded. The town now quiet, the turn-outs having accomplished their object. MANCHESTER. Friday, Seven o'Chck, p.m.

MEETING OF OPERATIVES. At a meeting of two hundred delegates, representing the various trades and mill hands of Manchester and its vicinities, as well as various parts of Lancashire and Yorkshire, held the Sherwood Inn, Tile Street, Manchester, at ten o'clock in the morning, it was resolved First—"That we, the delegates representing the various trades of Manchester and its vicinities, with delegates from various parts "f Lancashire and Yorkshire, do vno«t-emphatically declare that it our solemn and conscientious conviction that all evils which afflict society, and which >»aye pros trated the interests and energies he-Treat.-bndxof productag classes, arise solely from cla«-l>gi«lasWm''aiid that the Only remedy for the present alarming distresjjrnd-wide spread destitution the immediate and unmutilated'sdoption and carrying into law the document known as the People's Charter.' Second—"That this meeting recommend the people or all trades and callings to forthwith cease "work until the above document becomes the law of the land." JAMES FARRELL, Chairman. The adjourned meeting of mechanics was held at two o'clock to-day, in Carpenters' Hall, Mr John Middleton in the chair. The hall was crowded, and hundreds were assembled outside, who could not admission. Deputations from the spinners, weavers, tailors, glass blowers, dyers, masons, bricklayers, brick-makers, joiners, cabinet makers, mnulders, fustain cutters, watchmakers, hammer-men, brass mtjulders, tin plate workers, packers, rope makers, coppersmiths painters, plumbers and glaziers, iron plainer?, boiler mak?»s, and wire workers were received. The deputations assembled in great numbers, on the Urge platform of the hall. A letter or apology was read from the hatters, stating that in consequence the shortness of the notice, and the peculiar manner in which their business was conducted, they had not had time elect delegates. Donovan, as one of the delegates from the vers, stated that at several the meeting; of that body, it had been unanimously agreed that they would cease work, till the wages of were restored, and the People s Charter declared the law of the land. Mr Duffey. as the representative of the tailors and men's shoemakers, stated that those trades had come to similar resolutions. The delegates from the dyers, bricklayers, joiners and carpenters, the fustain cut. ters, the iron plainers, the boiler makers, the chest and trunk makers.the silk weavers, the sawyers, the card grinders, and others all represented that at the various meetings of those trades, it had been resolved unanimously, not to return to work till the People's Charter became the law of the land. delegate from Bradford, stated that the people of that town would not strike for wages but were quite willing to strike for the Charter. A letter was read from Stockport,
stating that all the mills in that town were stam'ing. and that a meeting thirty thousand persons had declared that they would not work again till they obtained the People's Charter. It was also stated that large meetings had been held Patncroft and Oldham, which the same determination also was come to. All these statements were received with enthusiastic cheering the meeting. .... , , The meeting in Carpenter's Hall is still going on. having already lasted for four hours and a half. Strong detachments of riflemen, police armed with cutlasses, and special constables are stationed In front of the Hall, and in the immediate neighbourhood are several bodies of the first Dragoons. The whole district exhibits appearance of great caoimotion. Messrs. Birley and Co's mills, the only mills Manchester, and which still continue work, are in the immediate neighbourhood, and are protected by strong dstschments of military and police. This afternoon, onef of the trains the Manchester and Leeds line of railway was at Rochdale the mob getting lon the engine, and r.-moving the lead plug. In about three hours the damage was repaired, the boiler refitted, and train proceeded on its route without any further damage being done. We understand that one of the men shot at Salford this afternoon has since died. Friday, Teno'Cloek, p.m. The meeting of mechanicsjnt Carpenter's Hall condoned about eight o'clock at lUmt. having ladled six hours. A good deal speechifying took pbambut considerable caution I was exercised not ovcrstew-jbe""ljr»Sds prudence 111 the ] language made use of. The priamfes! business consisted in 1 passing resolution confirmatory ofV one agreed to by the delegates at their mating in the md(Spg, and making arrangements for future meetings. It is stated t' c town that the tu'iw-outs from all the various disturbed districts, intend to march alto and concentrate their forces in Manchester to-morrow, and in addition to this it is the market day. it is not unlikely that hot work may take place. The magistrates have issued placards, requesting gentlemen who possess horses assemble horseback, the Town Hall, to-morrow morning. probably with view prevent the entrance of the bodies of turn outs from the surrounding districts. are convinced that if the people dis-1 '. play anything like pertinicity. °vereitieasirres will resorted Ito by the military and police, is well n exhausted. The military »taimied h?teare felt to be quite made-1 qua to the exigency, and we understand that a imputation magistrates left Manchester, to fly on Sir James Graham, to solicit additional military aid. It is rumoured also that from the employers Manchester to wait to morrow the employers of Ashton, with a view to making some arranjyments for satisfying the i lurn-nuts a compromise with them. This, however, is but a rumour. i persons are now in custody, and will remain in prison till the disturbances are subdued. A detachment of military proceeded to Todmorden today to quell the disturbances which had reached that place. this placp, as well SffSport. Ashton, Hyde, Heywood, F'ils- : worth. Lees, Hollingwood. Dukinfieldt, Eccies. Paleycroft, &<-. &r, the mills are all star.dm j, and the men of every trade have been compelled to turn out. a thine, that mall this vast manufacturing district. scarcely a mill chimney was to b.- seen smoking. Thousands will tomorrow night feel the necessity returning to their homes without their customary wages, and it will well this circumstance does not drive them to acts of desperation.

DISTURBANCES AT TODMORDEN. A gentleman, who came from Manchester yesterday afternoon, way Todmorden, states the streets were crowded the turn-outs, who appeared generally armed with formidable bludgeons. This a new feature, the Manchester turn-outs being unarmed, and generally reuniting the use of stones and brickbats. At the former place, the cannon were placed the streets, the shops and dwelling-houses were secured, and nil business was a stand. The same gentleman states that an intimation had been given that if the people do not disperse before to-morrow the troops would be ordered to fire upon the people. The town may in fact be said to be in state of siege, many of the inhabitants having laid in extra stocks of provisions, not expecting to be able leave their houses for some time.

Since the above was written, are further informed that the men of Todmorden and the neighbourhood purpose making descent upon Huddersfield to-morrow, and that from thence they say it is their intention to proceed eastwards. The colliers in the neighbourhood of Flockton, Thornhill, Horbury. and Wakefield, are ordered to strike on Monday. The whole of the mechanics employed at the Manchester terminus of the Manchester and Leeds Railway, are drawn from the shops, and a personal notice has been served on all the engine, drivers not to run any trains after to day. An attempt was made at the Oldham station last evening stop the trains, and a threat given that, if they did not, the bridge close would be pulled down : but, the arrival of Captain Lawes, with one the directors, and a posse of military, a special train, the mob dispersed.

Two weeks ago several of the wages of the locomotive department this line were reduced. This afternoon the men sent a deputation to the superintendent to say they would return work at their old wages] protected by the military, but this the directors have refused to comply with.

THE COLLIERS' STRIKE—ALARMING APPREHENSIONS IN THE MINING DISTRICTS NEAR GLASGOW.

The miners of Airdrie, Coatbridge/and vicinity have resolved to continue their alarming and ex. tensive strike. The potato fields in this quarter art still ravaged with the most barefaced audacity. The military are still stationed at Airdrie ana Coatbridge, but their presence seems to be of little avail restraining the starving depredators. On Monday night a large potato field, near Calder, the property of Mr. Lindsay, was completely cleared of its contents; and on the same day, another field Rasbush, not more than half a mile from the head-quarters of the military, was severely visited. Indeed, so far as appearances go, this turn-out would seem to be the most alarming that has ever taken place in the mining districts in the west of Scotland. At a large meeting of the colliers Saturday last they resolved unanimous- not to return to their employment until their reasonable" demands were complied with; and, at three district meetings held Monday, that! resolution was deliberately confirmed. There is not man working the coal ironstone pits Oundyvan, and all the iron furnaces are on short allowance. The masters are buying, borrowing, and exchanging quantities of coals, with the view of resisting the strikers, but serious fears are entertained that they will be unable continue. All the furnaces at Calder are extinguished. There are five out at Dundyvan, eight Gartsherrie, and two at Chapelhall. The strike already extends over about large works.

Stafford Thursday afternoon in consequence reports that was the intention of numerous hands of the discontented colliers to visit Stafford Gaol, with a view to attempt the liberation the men recently committed for offences perpetrated during the recent torn.out in the Potteries, the authorities were yesterday under considerable alarm, and took the most prompt effective means to defeat the plans the insurgents. A troop the Yeomanry was immediately called out, and a company of the 12th Regiment arrived in Stafford from Wolverhampton this morning. The whole affair, however, turns out to he founded in misapprehension. The Potteries, since Saturday night, have been quiet, and not the slightest movement has taken place towards Stafford. 

---

Plug riot
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/search/results/1842-01-01/1842-12-31?basicsearch=plug%20riot&somesearch=plug%20riot&exactsearch=false&retrievecountrycounts=false

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/search/results/1842-01-01/1842-12-31?basicsearch=plug%20riot&somesearch=plug%20riot&exactsearch=false&retrievecountrycounts=false Halifax Guardian - Saturday 03 September 1842 Huddersfield riots

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18420903/122/0008
Leeds Mercury - Saturday 03 September 1842


TO DO ABOVE

THE HUDDERSFIELD RIOTS.

JONATHAN FROST (60), WM. HOLDROYD (27), WM. WOODHEAD (34) and JOSEPH SHEARD (34) were charged with conspiring together for an alteration in the scale of wages, and with going about in an illegal manner to compel the mill ownera to submit to their terms, and with having compelled Henry Kershaw and others to leave their employment, by force and intimidation, and with conducting themselves in riotous and tumultuous manner.

Mr. BAINES and Mr. HALL conducted the prosecution; the prisoners were undefended.

Mr. BAINES stated the case. The charge against the defendants was that they had met in the town of Huddersfield, in a riotous manner, with various intents — principally that they did so to stop the mills, and thus compel the masters to agree to certain terms which they dictated. This was beyond doubt an illegal proceeding, and if they met in a tumultuous manner to enforce this conspiracy, then they were clearly concerned in a riot. The facts were that the 13th of August, (Saturday), a great number of people came from distant part—he believed across the border from Lancashire—to compel the mill-owners in Huddersfield to stop their works. They proceeded the mill of Mr. Wm. Brook. an extensive manufacturer, and one of the Magistrates of the West-Riding. They saw Mr. Brook, and stated their object; he remonstrated, when they told him that if his mill was not stopped on the Monday, they would compel him to put out his fires, and pull his mill down. They said they wanted a fair day's wage for a fair day's work, to which Mr. Brook replied, that his men were satisfied, and it was improper for them to interfere. On the Monday, Mr. Brook resumed his works as usual, but about twelve o'clock it was deemed necessary to stop the engine, and the engineer, Kershaw, was left on the premises, to take charge of them. About half past four o'clock a large mob, numbering about ten thousand, entered the town, the foremost ranks being armed with large bludgeons, which they brandished in a menacing manner as they passed the George, where the Magistrates were met. They again proceeded to Mr. Brook's mill, where they demanded admission, and required to know if the works were standing. Woodhead acted as leader, and insisted on going into the mill himself, and inspecting the engine, observing that he understood these matters. Whilst Woodhead was so engaged, and the mob were waiting for his return, Mr Brook arrived with the military, and entering the premises, Mr. Brook collared Woodhead himself, and gave him into the custody of the special constables, by whom he was taken to the George Inn. Soon after he was taken into custody, the prisoner Holroyd went the gaol, supposing to Woodhead to be there. He was at the head of a detachment of 200 men, and knocking at the door, he asked if there was any prisoner there. The gaoler said there were none of the rioters in the prison, but Holroyd insisted seeing over the gaol, which the keeper was obliged to submit to. After being satisfied, the party went away, Holroyd observing, that if they had found any of their people, they would have pulled the place down and murdered the gaoler. Holroyd had also been boasting to one of the Lancers that he sent his lads on Saturday, but this day (Monday) he had come himself. Almost immediately after the attack on the gaol, another detachment of the mob went to the door of the George Inn. There the prisoner Frost was particularly prominent. The magistrates were then engaged in hearing the cases of prisoners who had been taken into custody. The mob broke open the door, and the prisoner was one of those who forced himself into the passage, armed with stick, along with several other persons, beating and striking at the constables. The mob assumed so serious aspect that the riot act had to be read, and the military were called out and charged the mob, in order clear the streets.

Mr. Brook and a number of other persons proved these facts.

The prisoners in defence denied that they had taken an active part in the riots, but admitted having been with the mob, in the different places proved by the witnesses.

Mr. Justice Maule having summed up, the Jury found the prisoners all *Guilty*, except Sheard. against whom no evidence was offered.

TO DO MORE

Reports of various riot related court appearances

```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001652/18420818/036/0004
Globe - Thursday 18 August 1842

[Preceding page and column describes unrest in various districts, incl. gathering at Halifax of 12-15,000 people]

HUDDERSFIELD. Monday.—Soon after five o'clock this morning, a meeting of working people, not the regular turn-outs, but principally comprising women and children, was held at Back Green. Their number, probably, would be about four hundred. Shortly after they had mustered, Mr. William Brook, the magistrate, accompanied by a number of special constables, proceeded to the spot, and advised them to go home; they remained some time longer, but eventually dispersed between six and seven peaceably.

But the town was not destined to remain quiet all the day. The workers of mischief were marching from Lancashire, and ere night set in the town was one alarming scene of riot and confusion. The forenoon passed off without any particular disturbance taking place; yet still the inhabitants were in hourly expectation of being surrounded by the mob from the outskirts. The only mills which ventured to resume work were those of Messrs. Starkey Brothers, Mr. George Crossland, Messrs. Brook, and Messrs. Swaine and Webb. These mills, however, were forced to succumb to the turn-outs before five o'clock in the afternoon.

The disturbances commenced shortly after four o'clock, on the arrival of a mob, whose number some have ventured to estimate at 20,000, but we should imagine this would be far above the mark. These men came down the Meltham and Holme valleys, in distinct parties, out of Lancashire, and they formed a grand coalition at Armitage-bridge. On their way to Huddersfield they attacked and stopped the mills of Messrs. Brook Brothers, Meltham-mills; Messrs. Stables, of Crossland-mills; Messrs. Wrigley's, of Netherton; Messrs. Beaumont and Stooks (commonly called Lord's-mill), at Honley; Messrs. D. Shaw, Son, and Co., Henley; Messrs. Beaumont, Vickerman, and Co., Steps-mill. They then proceeded to the Hall Ings colliery; to John Brook and Son's, at Armitage-bridge; and the last mill which they forced on the road was that of Mr. I. T. C. Wrigley. At all these places the men had all their own way, their numbers defying opposition.

They arrived in Huddersfield about half-past four o'clock, and their formidable appearance, being armed with thick sticks and bludgeons, which they continually brandished about, and the bold front which they assumed, showed that they had come prepared for the worst. The first move they made on entering the town was direct to the mill of Messrs. Henry Brook and Sons, which they forcibly entered, and knocked the plug out of the boiler. This was about twenty minutes to five o'clock. All the shops were closed, and every where alarm took hold of the most stout-hearted. The magistrates, the soldiers, and the special constables then prepared to resist the further progress of the assailants by scouring the streets; and the first rencontre which the soldiers had with the mob was at Messrs. Brook's mill, where they were charged by the Lancers. One man was here wounded by a lance of one of the soldiers, and another rioter was taken prisoner to the George Inn. To prevent further mischief and bloodshed, Mr. Brook, at this stage of the riot, addressed the men in a friendly manner, and offered them half an hour in which to disperse, which they promised to do. In the mean time the Riot Act had been read by Mr. Wm. Armitage, the magistrate, opposite Mr. Brook's factory, and it was subsequently read a second time near the George Inn.

After leaving Mr. Brook's mill, the soldiers and all the special constables then entered into the George Inn yard. The mob, instead of dispersing, went to the prison (or, as it is called, the towzer), forced the doors, and demanded the release of the prisoner. On being told he was not in confinement there, they were not satisfied without being shown through every cell, and the keeper was obliged to comply with the demand.

The mob then proceeded to the George Inn, and made a desperate attempt to force their way in to rescue the prisoner, but they were as determinedly repulsed by the special constables, who came out of the yard, and then there was a prolonged and violent conflict between the two antagonist powers, in the midst of which the military made their appearance and formed into square. After the magistrates had repeatedly entreated the people to separate, and not finding them willing to do so, the soldiers were ordered to charge. The magistrates then rode up and down the streets, urging the people to get out of the way, as the soldiers were about to fire. Mr. Joseph Starkey was particularly active at this crisis. Tho people then dispersed, expecting every moment the firing of the soldiers. No hostile movement, however, then took place, the soldiers remaining in one position in front of the George Inn, for at least twenty minutes.

During the cessation the people gradually surrounded the troops, and several parleys took place between the magistrates and the people, until at length the latter become so audacious in their behaviour, that no alternative was left but to order the military to charge, whereupon one of the most terrific scenes we ever beheld took place; and it was during this alarming crisis that our reporter entered the town in the omnibus from the Cooper-bridge station, at about a quarter past six. The omnibus drove to the Swan Inn, in Market-street, but it had no sooner reached its destination than it was surrounded by three or four soldiers on horseback, and before the unoffending but unlucky travellers could get out of the way, naked swords were flying about their heads in all directions, and our reporter was within a hair's breadth of receiving a slash on the head. This unwelcome reception, however, was avoided by making a precipitate retreat, and some of his companions were likewise fortunate; but one man who had mounted the coach for the purpose of getting his luggage, on being asked by one of the soldiers what he was doing there, replied, "Go to h———." One of the soldiers surrounding the omnibus, who appeared to act in a much more furious manner than was warranted by the circumstances, then struck one of the passengers a most severe blow with his sword on the back of the neck, which had nearly thrown him to the ground. Another of the passengers received a blow in descending from the coach. This sudden attack on the passengers cannot too strongly be condemned. The soldiers no doubt had orders to clear the streets; but in doing their duty it becomes them to exercise discretion in the use of their weapons, and not to strike at parties who could not possibly have taken part in previous disturbances. It was only by the interference of three special constables that the reporters obtained protection, and were conducted in safety to the George Inn.

The scene in the streets at this period was fearful. Every shop and house was closed. The Lancers, backed by the special constables, struck terror into the hearts of the mob, who fled before them in the greatest confusion, and by seven o'clock not a straggler was to be seen.

The special constables were particularly active in securing the ringleaders, and the number taken into custody at this period and during the afternoon amounted to 18, including one woman, all of whom were chained and lodged in the George Inn, the prison being considered unsafe.

In the skirmishing which took place a great number of persons were more or less wounded, and one of the soldiers boasted that he had felled seven in about two minutes. It was reported that one of the wounded was a young man in the employ of Mr. Schwann; and two others were fatally injured.

Up to a late hour the authorities were employed in keeping the streets clear.
```

```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002408/18420816/042/0006 Morning Herald (London) - Tuesday 16 August 1842

RIOTING IN YORKSHIRE.

(From a Fourth Edition of the Leeds Mercury.).

Our reporter, on his return to Leeds this evening, has received particular and positive information the mill-hands have been turned out at Huddersfield. This information was given to him in the train by a manufacturer who entered the carriage at Cooperbridge, the Huddersfield station, and who declared that he had himself seen the movements of the mob, and that his own mill had been stopped. A railway guard, who arrived here at half-past four, brought the information that the turn•outs had begun their operations at Huddersfield; but he was told that the party who produced the turn out there went from Leeds We are bound to say, however, that we have not heard these important particulars confirmed from any other quarter, and we cannot help thinking that conirmation would have reached Leeds if such events had really occurred at a town so near as Huddersfield. We only, therefore, give the following statement just as our reporter received it, and without vouching for its truth. He was informed as follows: "A body of the Todmorden turn-outs (about 700 in number) reacted Huddersfield this afternoon at about two o'clock, and having brought everything to a stand between that place and Todmorden, they at once began to call out the workpeople from the factories. In a great majority of the cases they met with no opposition, the workpeople manifesting every disposition to join the mob. Where resistance was offered they immediately set about drawing out the boilerplugs, defying all opposition; and before half-past four o'clock there was not a factory at work either in Huddersfield or the surrounding districts. No attempts to injure either property or person were manifested. Up to six o'clock the combined turn-outs were peaceably perambulating the streets in one great procession." - - Our reporter resumes the particulars he has gained, as follows:—"The rioters having stopped all the mills at Mytholmroyd, some of them retired to Cragg Valley, but others went off in a detachment to Hud dersfield. Huddersfield, it is understood, is the last place that it is intended to visit to-day. But for Monday morning, at seven o'clock, the instructions are, that those who ard at Huddersfield, and the party at Cragg Valley, shall each make a descent upon other parts of Yorkshire." (From a Fifth Edition of the Leeds Mercury) Saturday, 11 o'clock, p.m.— We learn by gentlemen who have just reached Leeds from Huddersfield, a full confirmation of the facts stated in our fourth edition as to the turn-out of all the mill-hands in that town. The rioters who invaded this town came from Oldham, not, as had been stated, from Todmorden. They were about 5,000 or 6,000, with many women. They arrived at three o'clock p.m., and went early to the mill of Messrs. Starkey Brothers, who, being magistrates, blockaded the gates, and declared that they would read the Riot Act. The turn-outs disregarded these threats, broke open the gates, entered the mill, and turned out every hand. The rioters then proceeded to Mr. Kay's mill, and turned out all the hands. At the mill of Mr. William Brook, the magistrate, in North-street, that gentleman made some opposition, but it was altogether fruitless; the mob broke into the mill, burst in the plug of the steam-engine boilers, and turned out all the workmen. In fact, the hands were expelled from every mill in the town in the curse of the afternoon. A meeting was held, but we do not know the resolutions come to. After the mills had been stopped, the invaders marched through the town, many of them begging, but not committing any acts of plunder. The bulk of the invaders from the cotton districts are thought to have returned home into Lancashire; but it was said that many would attend the meeting of the colliers at Wakefield on Monday next. In Leeds the authorities are quite on the alert. Arrangements are making to swear in 500 special constables on Monday morning. The town is also provided with a good military force, the 17th lancers (Prince George of Cambridge's regiment), and one or two troops of artillery being at our barracks. We learn from a gentleman who has been in many of the mills in this neighbourhood to-day, that the best disposition is manifested by the workmen who will resist any attempt to seduce or intimidate them. A squadron of the 11th hussars have received orders from Colonel Wemyss, at Manchester, to march from York to Rochdale; they will arrive in Leeds to-morrow.
```

```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001578/18420813/054/0014
Illustrated London News - Saturday 13 August 1842

FURTHER OUTRAGES. GIRL KILLED.

Between three and four o'clock a large mob proceeded along Oxford-road, for the purpose of stopping Messrs. Birley's mill and that of the Oxford-road Twist Company. On arriving at the latter they demanded that the hands should be turned out. Mr. Henry Cooke, one of the partners, complied with their request, and immediately ordered the engines to be stopped. Not content with this, they demanded leave to enter the mill, in order that they might be sure of no one remaining inside. On his refusal to let them do so, they instantly commenced the work of destruction by smashing to pieces the windows of the porter's lodge, at the north-east corner, and entered the mill-yard. Fortunately the military arrived at this juncture, and the only damage committed was the flinging a skipful of bobbins into the street. Mr. D. Maude and Inspector Irwin arrived at the same time, and succeeded, with the assistance of the police and military, in apprehending 14 of the rioters. While the military were escorting the prisoners to the Town-hall, the mob proceeded to Messrs. Birley's mill, the windows of which they immediately commenced breaking. The inmates set to work a force-pump, worked by the engine, to throw water on the crowd; but, this not proving an effectual defence, they resorted to more formidable weapons. Several of them ascended to the roof, and flung down stones, pieces of iron, and other missiles, with such fatal effect that several persons were hurt, and a young girl, it is said, was killed on the spot. The ammunition of the mob having been exhausted before they had broken all the windows, they seized a cart loaded with coals, which was on its way to the factory, tilted it up, and employed the contents in finishing the work of destruction. On the soldiers and police making their appearance, the mob dispersed, and Inspectors Irwin, M'Mullen, and Maybury, apprehended eight men in the act of breaking windows. 
```


--
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000298/18420820/038/0004
Leicestershire Mercury - Saturday 20 August 1842

TO DO

THE RIOTS.

MANCHESTER.

On Thursday week, at three in the morning, mounted express arrived at the Town Hall, with the intelligence that the colliers and excavators were coming in body from Harpurley. A meeting of the Magistrates was held. A strong detachment of cavalry, t vo companies of Rifles, with eighty police and special constables, with two pieces of artillery, were sent to take possession of the open space in Ancoates, commanding the two main entrances into the (own this direction. Some thousands of persons had assembled, and the Riot Act was soon after read, but without any effect in causing them to disperse. A large meeting was held at six, in the fields at Granby-row, when the riot act was read and the assembly dispersed the military. After these had retired, fresh attack was made Messrs. Birley's mill, in defence of which several of the police were seriously injured, some so severely as to render their immediate removal to the infirmary necessary. The mob were, however, effectually routed after stout resistance. During the morning crowds were wandering about the town large gangs, begging bread, and obtaining money by threats, solicitations failed, from persons whom they met in the streets; and several of the smaller shops in Chorlton, Medlock, and Hulme, they resorted to open plunder. At one o'clock a meeting of mill-owners, merchants, &c, was called by the mayor, when Mr. Houldsworth recommended that the people belonging to every mill should be made special constables and armed, each would then be adequate to its own defence. In one half hour half the property in Manchester might be destroyed. The matter was referred to the Magistrates. Soon after, the. magistrates issued bills, calling on all well-disposed persons to be sworn as special constables; and subsequently the county magistrates for the division did the same. Between one and two serious affray took place in Oxford-road. It was reported that a mob were breaking open provision shops and destroying the windows and property of shopkeepers. Four policemen and forty pensioners, and Sub-Inspector Dale, were dispatched to the spot, where they found the rioting had ceased. They were returning, when the mob assailed them with stones. The pensioners took to flight, leaving the policemen to the mercy of the mob. They fought their way to some private houses, where shelter was given them by an old woman. The mob broke in, and. dragging the policemen out, beat them in an unmerciful manner. Bagnall, aged 66, was dreadfully cut about the head and shoulders, and the ruffians, after leaping on his body several times, left him for dead. Dale and the others suffered severely. not probable that any them would have escaped With their lives had not the old woman conveyed information to the military, who captured about forty. Dale and were conveyed to the Infirmary. At five, order was issued from the magistrates, forbidding tumultuous meetings. adjourned meeting was also Ik Id, when the magistrates concurred in the recommendation made to them in the morning. During the day, the pensioners were drilled. Various mobs turned out the workmen on the highways; at the new church building the Stretford New Road; the hands at rope walk, near Jackson's-lane, and the bricklayers employed the houses in New Brighton. The latter made slight resistance, but were pelted with stones, and they then laid aside their tools. Marauding parties were about Greenheys during most of the afternoon as well as morning, visiting private houses and shops. In many streets they proceeded house-row, and obtained a good deal of money and bread, some giving as much as half-a-crown. One gentleman in Cheetham, gave a couple of sovereigns. During the afternoon the town became much more peaceable. A couple of field pieces were planted the artillery at New Cross in the morning, but the better appearance of things led to the withdrawal of this force in the evening. Much provision was wasted. A gang of boys, who obtained bread from females, were pelting each other with it. A meeting of dele, gates from the trades was summoned to be held next morning, and the parties were so far regardful of the law, to direct that the delegates be elected open meetings. the evening, a meeting the populace was held in the Carpenter's Hall, when very inflammatory language was held. It was remarked, that in the riots, the older boys were cunningly put forward to take the most conspicuous and dangerous part. Two gentlemen, passing along Oxford-road, about seven o':lock, were attacked by a mob, and severely wounded with stones thrown in their faces. The number of prisoners to this time was 122, and of persons wounded in the infirmary, chiefly policemen and special constables, twenty-three. On Friday morning an attack was made on Messrs. Ockenshaw's silk mills, when ten of the rioters were taken. A series of resolutions, asserting a determination to have the Charter, were circulated this day. In the afternoon, the Cheetham Mill works were attacked, but successfully defended the inmates. Messr?. Birley's mill was also attacked. Au open-air meeting was held at Granby-row Fields. Mr. Maude, magistrate, went and gave them 5 minutes to disperse, which, not doing, he ordered the military to charge, which they did, and immediately cleared the fields. An attack was made a short time since on several of the provision shops in Deansgate, when detachment of police, under Superintendent Beswick, marched out and secured many of the offenders. On Saturday, a skinner's establishment at Dail Bridge, which had twice resisted the rioters, was obliged yield, the police being absent; and the men were turned out. There were a great number of stones taken from the neighbourhood by the police, prmably two or three tons weight, most of which were found secreted in the cottages of the poor Irish. A special train arrived at three, with intelligence of a serious riot at Preston (thirty-two miles off). Several inhabitants had come from thence for safety, and a request was made for military aid. In the evening, the power-loom weavers met, and resolved not to work without the prices of 1820, an extreme rt solution not likely to succeed. The prisoners now amounted to 234. On Sunday, the town was quiet; but a meeting of the populace was held at Eccles, four miles distant. Six huudred of the Coldstream Guards, and two pieces cannon, arrived in the morning and proceeded to Preston. the afternoon, the 58th regiment, strong, arrived from Dublin. During the day, bills were issued, signed by the Chairman of the delegates of trades, legally elected," calling meeting on Monday. These bills contained the following passage : most solemnly pledge ourselves to persevere in our exertions, until achieve the complete emancipation of our brethren of the middle and working classes from the thraldom of monopoly and class legislation, the legal establishment of the People's Charter. The trades great Britain carried the Reform Bill, and the trades Britain shall carry the Charter." A request for military was received fsom Bury. Monday, the town was quiet. Bills were placarded, advising a run for gold. Tuesday was tho Anniversary of the bloody Tory massacre at Peterloo. There was a great influx of strangers. The procession and meeting in connexion with Hunt's Monument were forbidden the authorities. A delegates' meeting was held in the morning, when instructions were issued to the people to carefuiiy avoid coming in contact with the military. The day passed off peaceably. The military strength this day was men and six cannon. At meeting of delegates il was resolved to keep the peace, and to hold out for the wages of lS:i9, and for the Charter. The number of mounted special constables this day was 150, total specials nearly 6,000. A meeting of delegates was held in the evening, when, out of eighty-two, fifty-two were for moving for the Charter, nineteen for going for wages, seven for avoiding politics, and three neutral. The meeting in commemoration of Henry Hunt was held Tuesday evening, within doors, when various speakers, including Mr. Cooper, of Leicester, addressed them. The reporters, who had been invited to present, were characterized as spies. A meeting the Hall of Science was dispersed the authorities. SALFORD. Thursday week, soon after three o'clock in the morning, the inhabitants of Salford were alarmed one of the most terrific outbreaks of fire that has occurred for many years. The fire engines promptly attended, accompanied by strong detachments of military. It was found to have taken place at a steam saw-mill, and damage was done to the extend of £600, the whole which is covered by insurance. [A resident informs us that this is the fifth saw mill burnt there within a short period En.L.M.J Friday, attack was made on print works the Messrs. Wilson, who refused to stop, and successfully beat off the assailants.

OLDHAM. iniils Oldham were forcibly stopped on Thursday week; and the populace marched out and sfo ePed the mills at Siiaw, Rochdale, Royston, and Heywood. The prices of 1840 were demanded.

BOLTON. Yesterday week, the police attempted to disperse a 'arge crowd in the Market-place, but their force was inefficient; the Highlanders were caHed out, and they were dispersed. Several skirmishes took place, and stones were throws, but nothing more material than one of the soldiers and one or two of the police slightly wounded occurred. Saturday, noon, the tow* was shaken from its "propriety" a mob, consisting of at least 5,000 persons, armed with bludgeons, staves, bars of iron, or anything else calculated to knock a man's brains out, entering the town, flourishing their weapons, and giving loud huzzas. Having visited the mills, they demanded bread from the shops, and money from persons they met. Their language was exceedingly violent, levelled principally against the police; On their return from the mills very many were drunk from liquor they had begged or demanded. They are principally from Bury, Heywood, Tottington, and surrounding neighbourhood. WIGAN. As soon as the Wigan and Worsley yeomanry had gone on Monday, to Preston, mob assembled, armed with bludgeons, proceeded to the mills, collieries, and factories, stopped the engines, and turned upwards of 3,000 persons out of employment. They marched out of the town with yells of exultation towards the seat of the Earl of Balcarras, at Hay, in which neighbourhood there are many collieries. They committed no other violence to property than demanding provisions from the shopkeepers, which were given them. One of the curates of Wigan (Rev. Mr. Bessell) on endeavouring to remonstrate with them, was struck on the head, but suffered material injury. A company of the 72nd Highlanders, under the command of Capt. Balfour, is in the town. On the shutters of several closed shops the Chartists posted resolutions entered in at Manchester, that the workmen there had resolved not again to work till the Charter became law. The bludgeons with which the mob were armed were formidable and destructive, about half a yard in length, and the thickness of a constable's staff. There was a great uniformity in their appearance, and they seemed as if they were all from the same manufactory. ASHTON. Here the shopkeepers formed a Committee of Mediation, and procured an interview between the manufacturers, who agreed to an advance if it could be made uniform throughout the district, stating that they would much rather advance than reduce. BURY. Here the hands were visited, and compelled to leave work, and crowds have wandered about, demanding provisions.

PRESTON. At six on Saturday morning, mob assembled and proceeded to stop the factories. The police and a party of the 72nd Highlanders went to meet them. The Riot Act was then read, and Chief Constable Woodfood, and Mr. Banister, Superintendent of Police, endeavoured to persuade the mob retire, and while so engaged one of the rioters aimed a stone surely at Captain Woodford that it felled him the ground, and while there they had the brutality to kick him. Immense bodies stones were now thrown at the police and soldiers, many of the former being much hurt, and part of the mob having gone up Fox street they had the advantage of stoning the military from both sides. Under these circumstances, after another attempt to persuade them, and after the Riot Act had been knocked out of the Mayor's hand, orders were given to fire; the military obeyed, and several of the mob fell. This did not appear to have much effect, for one fellow, named Lancaster, who, is believed, came from Blackburn, came out in front of the mob, and when the act of lifting his hand to throw a stone was singled out by one of the 72nd, who fired, and fell. This appeared to put damper the proceedings of the mob, and they began to separate. Eight were wounded, four of them very severely. 150 Riflemen speedily arrived from Manchester. There was further disturbance. One of the wounded rioters died on Sunday evening, and another on Monday. On Tuesday morning the mills recommenced, except Mr. Ainsworth's.

BLACKBURN. A mob commenced turning out the hands here, on Monday, and twenty-five of them were apprehended. Subsequently while turning out, and breaking windows, they were fired on by the military, and one man had eye and part of his forehead shot off, and was removed in a hopeless .state. A young Irish girl, returning from work, had the misfortune to be struck a couple of balls, and was taken off in precarious state* In the afternoon, two troops of dragoons arrived from Burnley. The magistrates issued an order for all public houses in the district to be closed for lhe present at five.

MINOR TOWNS IN LANCASHIRE. On Thursday week, the colliers turned out at Lord Egerton's, at Worsley, and the mills at Glossop, Mottam, Staley Bridge, &c., were closed. On Saturday, about 4,000 including women, and many of them armed with clubs, stopped the works at Cow-brigs, Winters, gpaw-hole, Underbank, Cales, Calderside, Mytholin.and Lambank and marched into Hebden Bridge. On Sunday, a large Chartist meeting was held on Marsden Heights, near Burnley, and another consisting of about 3,000, at Bull Hill, between Bury and Rochdale. On Friday, the hands were turned out at Stakehill and Heywood (where there was meeting and the wages of 1840 were demanded). Those at Middleton were turned out on Thursday. On Friday, a violent attack was made on Mr. Gray's Mill, at Quarry Bridge near Winslow, and much damage done. Provisions were demanded the village. On Saturday, at Staley Bridge, and on Monday at Eccles, it was resolved not to work till the Charter had become law.

HUDDERSFIELD. On Saturday hundreds men, women, and lads arrived here from different parts of Lancashire, stopping all the mills their route, and turning out the hands, as also the hands from machine makers' establishments, and indeed any where a dozen people were employed. They had stopped all kinds of manufacturing operations here and in the neighbourhood, pulling out the plugs from the boilers, and demanding the instant discharge of the people employed, and their demands have, in all cases, been complied with by the masters. The Messrs. Starkie, who employ large number of hands, shut their gates in order to prevent the turn-outs from entering; but finding it useless to resist the repeated demands, accompanied threats, of the besiegers, they length gave way. They levy contributions among the shopkeepers as they move along, and the latter, acting upon Toby Fletcher's principle, that quietness was best, have handed them loaf or two, as their cry is generally "Bread —Give us bread The operatives turned out here assemble groups, asking what to be the end it; whilst sensible men look to the cause—a wicked, oppressing, ignorant, and poverty-creating government. answer to a question put to the men, of what they were going to do, they say, "All we want is a fair day's wages for a fair day's work". There was general turn-out on Monday; and an immense mob strangers arrived on Monday night. One man was taken in the attack the mills Several attempts were made to rescue him. clearing the streets in the evening, when an omnibus Wat coming in, the soldiers stupidly and reprehensibly cut :imong the passengers, several of whom were hurt.

ROCHDALE. A mob, partly from Oldham, reached Rochdale on Thursday week. Many of the factories are situated in Roy ton, on account of its nearness to tiie canal. Mr. Sutcliffe and Messrs. Hoyle and Livesay were sura, msned to stop the mills; they complied, as it would have been unavailing to contend against 5,000 or 6,000 people. ivlr. Ashworth, the Magistrate, met the people here, and tried to stop them in their course, but to no purpose. They promised him not to break the peace, and assured him their object was not plunder. They were willing to work, they said, and all they wanted was a "fair day's wages for a fair day's work." Mr Brierley was ordered to stop his mill; when he asked what their object was, they replied, they wanted the wages they had 1840. Here the hands were turned out. The next mill they came to was Mr. Holt's, who had the gates locked, but informed them that had stopped working. This was not deemed satisfactory, all other cases they pulled the plug out of the boiler, and turned the water into the fire. A number of persons immediately climbed over the gates, and knocked out the plug, v. hich would soon extinguish the fire. The mob then went Mr. Hoyle's corn mill, and informed the men they must keep at work, as they would want.some corn before the next week. They paid the saw mill company visit; but as a high pressure engine is used here, it was not deemed safe to pull the plug : the fire was put out, and the steam let off by opening the valve. Messrs. Butterworth and Heape, Messrs. Radcliffe, and Mr. Siiore's mills were stopped, well as every other kind workshop in Oldham-road, when the mob came down into the town, and ordered the men out the mills of Messrs. Chadwick, Kelsall and Bartlemore, Lomax, Kelsall, Pagon and Ogden, Proctor and Brothers, and Howard. When the mob came down Drake-street, it is supposed that they were about 15.000 persons. They were led up females, eight or ten abreast, eight or ten abreast, singing some livelysong, and Mr. G. Ashworth, the magistrate, on horseback, in the midst of the procession, ready cheok any excess breach the peace. The shopkeepers gave or threw loaves to the crowd. The mob proceeded to Cronkeyshaw, to Mr. John Blight's factory, and demanded the release .f the hands, which was com. plied with. A meeting was then held the moor. party was then dismissed to Whitworth and Facet, to stop the mills. Mills at Healey Hall, Tunnicliffe und Broadley, were stopped- Another party was diamissed to Hooley Clough and Heywood, for the same purpose. The shops remained closed all day on Thursday. Every iron foundry and workshop, where men were employed, received a visit, and had strict injunctions to leave off. A number at work at St. Mary's Church were compelled to desist. Mechanics and every kind of operatives, struck and joined the mass. Several provision shops handed loaves of bread to the mob in the streets, which they devoured like hungry wolves. Other shopkeepers collected money, and gave it to the leaders, wbo immediately went and purchased bread, which they divided amongst their followers. In one or two instances, loaves were taken without leave by some young lads; but this conduct was not tolerated by the leaders. Several gentlemen gave money very liberally, which in all cases was spent in bread for those who had come a great distance. About fifty women went into Tweeddale's Hotel, and were treated with a good dinner and plenty to drink, for which they were extremely grateful, being at a distance from home. At seven a meeting was held on Cronkeyshaw. There could not be fewer than 7,000 parsons present, one-fourth of whom were females. One of the speakers said he never could take part against the manufacturers, who were in as bad a situation as the workmen. The landowners had made a law to prevent them exchanging their goods for corn, whereby they were as much under aristocratic oppression, as the poorest man amongst them. He hoped they would do all in their power for the Repeal of the Corn Laws, and he trusted the middle class would assist them to procure the Charter, which would a remedy for all the evils the working man had to complain of. The aristocracy looked for the protection of their land; let the poor man follow their example, and protect the wages of labour. The meeting should adjourn till five on Friday morning. HALIFAX. The populace met here on Monday morning, at five o'clock, and were addressed by a Chartist; they were afterwards joined by an immense body from other towns, and proceeded turn out the men. Mr. Akroyd's, they insisted upon not only plugging the boilers, but emptying the reservoir, which it would take weeks to fill; but Mr. A. resisted, and they were about to attack his house, when the military came up. At one mill th<-y did more than worth damage. Subsequently, the streets were twice cleared soldiers. On Tuesday morning, there was a riotous atlaek on mill which had commenced working. The military fired, three persons were wounded, and thirty-six prisoners taken.

BRADFORD. On Tuesday immense multitude assembled, and Mr. Rand's mill, after several hours' resistance, was closed. By the afternoon, all the mills but two had been stopped. Wednesday morning, large accession men with bludgeons came in. They were dispersed twenty or thirty times by the military.

MINOR TOWNS IN YORKSHIRE. The hands at Bruntcliffethorn were turned out on Tuesday. At the Elland Railway Station, the same day, a daring attack was made on a party of Lancers, who had just escorted thithersome prisoners; the lives of two of the soldiers are despaired of. At Stanningtey the mills were stepped on Wednesday, and the shops of provisions plundered. At Somerby Bridge the mills were stopped a mob proceeding to Halifax. On Monday a large meeting was held at Skircoat Moor. A large party of the mob dispersed Halifax slept on the Moor during Monday night. The mills at Salterhebble and Queenshead were stopped on Monday, and at Mr. Foster's at the latter place, the mob demanded money, and he gave them £2. At Todmorden, on Sunday night, some miscreants inundated a pit and drowned sixteen horse-. Two cows were slaughtered and stolen the same night. During the affray, at Elland, omibus of'railway passengers had a promise of safe conduct through the mob; but the soldiers coming soon after, pelting commenced, and Mr. Barker, reporter for the Northern Star, a young lady of Leeds, and others, were much hurt.

MACCLESFIELD. The processiou which left Stockport, on Saturday morning, was joined at Poynton and neighbourhood, parties from Oldham, Ashton, Hyde, &c. At Hazel Grove, they were joined silk weaver;; and Poyiiton the colliers were compelled loleave work, and joined the mob. They then proceeded to Macclesfield; but, before arriving, separated, one party taking the road to Bollington, on arriving at which place, the mills there were immediately stopped. The shop, keepers were visited, and asked for bread, which they gave liberally. No outrage was committed. The crowd, to the number of 12,000 or 14,000, assembled on Park-green, and were addressed various speakers, when it was determined to stand out, and wait the directions of the Conference, to be neld in Manchester on Wednesday next. One the speakers told them, lhat if they ventured to work again, turn-outs from other places were stopping in Maccktfield all night, some of whom were provided with pigeons, and they would be sent off; so that the people Stockport would know in less than half an hour after a mill had resumed working, and they would come back. He also stated that pigeons would be sent from Bollingion.

STOCKPORT. About 20,000 men and boys entered Stockport on Thursday week, and immediately proceeded to turn out all hands. One master, who refused to stop his engine, was beaten. At noon, the yeomanry and regulars were assembled in the market place when an immense mob, flourishing bludgeons, marched round them, with shouts of defiance; and then proceeded to the workhouse, where they seized all the bread iv the house, amounting to 072 loaves, and dinner which had been prepared for the Guardians, and £1 copper. of the crowd who al tacked the workhouse were apprehended. While the magistrates were examining the prisoners, four deputies were admitted who demanded their release, asserting that they were illegally seized, having been only asking for bread, while a starving state. The deputies having retired, the examinations the witnesses, and inquiry into the statements the prisoners themselves were resumed and occupied the Court a considerable time. The result was the discharge of 30, they having only been found in of loaves/whilst the remaining IS, were committed to Chester Assizes for trial; two manded, and the other committed to Knutsford for one month's hard labour, for assaulting a Yeomanry officer. Those committed were safely removed to Knutsford the same evening. Friday morning at five there was an immense meeting of the populate, who were exhorted keep the peace, but not to work. About half past six they separated, and the peacession proceeded through the town Lwenshulme, Heatmi Mersey, Siyall. In they sacked the provision-shop person named Hunt, and several houses, nnd exposed the loaves upon the ends their sticks amidst tremendous shouting. Another portion of Stockport people proceeded towards Grove, levying contributions from the respectable householders their way, including those of the Coroner and J. Thornhill, Esq,; and falling in with mob from Hyde, Woodley, &c., the joint bodies marched Poynton, and stopped all the pits. They afternwards proceeded to the hall, and demanded provisions. They were supplied with both bread and money; and Mr. Christy having still further gratilied them giving the bread from the Crescent," they went forwards iiollingion -and Macclesfield, without committing any breach the peace.

DERBY. A body of Stockingmakers entered Derby on Tuesday, and succeeded iv turning out the hands there.

SCOTLAND. dunk INS. In consequence of reduction of wages, riotous proceedings took place here last week. The mob set fire to the looms one two factories, which were consumed, though the flames wero extinguished before the buildings were reached. The house of a partner in one of the factories was gutted.

GLASGOW. The strike continues in this vicinity and has extended Renfrewshire.

--

```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown

https://archive.org/details/risingsluddites00peelgoog/page/n8/mode/2up
THE RISINGS OF THE LUDDITES

CHARTISTS AND PLUG_DRAWERS

Frank Peel

SECOND EDITION.

1888

pp.338-347

CHAPTER XXXIX. The Plug Riots.

A crouching dastard sure is he,  
Who would not fight for liberty,  
And dies to mako old England free,  
From all her load of tyranny.— *Bamford.*

Trade in 1842, the year of the plug riots, was worse than ever, and the sufferings of the working classes throughout Yorkshire and Lancashire were very great. It was hoped that as summer came on matters might improve, but they grew gradually worse, and at the beginning of August the distress was at its height. The corn laws were then in full operation, and the ports being closed the people throughout the country were starving, In the north it was reported that a fourth part of the population were dying of famine. At Stockport half the masters had failed, and five thousand workpeople were walking the streets, nor were they much better in any of the towns in Lancashire. The Chartist movement had gathered much strength during the past year, and the working classes in all the large towns were in a state of great discontent and disaffection. The masses of the people were still persuaded that the "People's Charter" would enable them to secure higher wages and better food, and that for that very reason the "aristocrats," against whom they inveighed so furiously would not grant it. Another immense petition in favour of the charter was presented in the House of Commons in May, and great meetings were of almost nightly ocoorrence in all large towns of Yorkshire. At Leeds the pauper stone heaps now amounted to one hundred and fifty thousand tons, and the guardians offered 6/- weekly for doing nothing rather than 7/6 for stone breaking. Poor rates swelled to the size of rents, and the middle classes viewed with dismay the heavy drain on their resources. Towards the end of June a meeting of tradesmen and shopkeepers was held in the Bradford courthouse, "to enable them publicly to make known the unparalleled distress which prevailed, and the decay of trade consequent thereon, and to adopt such measures relative thereto as might be deemed advisable with a view to avert impending ruin."

Disturbances of an extraordinary character, and on a large scale took place in Lancashire, which speedily assumed an alarming character. They commenced at Staleybridge. On Sunday, August 7th, a large meeting was hold at Mottram Moor, which was attended by eight or ten thousand people. Tho disturbances originated in this way:— Some of the manufacturers of Staleybridge finding, as they stated, that others in the vicinity were paying lower wages than they were gave notice of a reduction. The workmen cousented at one mill at the expiration of the notice to take the lower price. At another place, however, they refused to submit to the change. The workpeople of the firm last mentioned waited upon their employers, Bayley Brothers, and spake roughly on the proposed reduction, on which one of the masters said if they took the matter up in that spirit they had better play until they thought differently of it. On hearing this the deputation set up a loud shout, when all the hands left the mill, without waiting for any formal answer to the demands of their representatives. Proceeding to the different mills in the town, the workpeople nearly all turned out and joined them, and their number soon swelled to more than 5000, of whom one-third were females. Day by day they extended their march and emboldened by their numbers they determined to put an end to all work until their political demands were met. In accordance with this resolve they stopped all the collieries, and insisted upon men of all trades participating in the general holiday. Finding that all were not willing to join in the mad enterprise, they did not hesitate to overawe and coerce them, and procuring a number of formidable bludgeons, they tried to intimidate any workman who resisted them. Proceeding to the print works of Thomas Hoyle and Son, who had made themselves very obnoxious, they spoiled a great many of their goods, and then went on to Ashton, where they were joined by fresh crowds. An immense meeting was held there, when the passions of the mob were inflamed by the fiery oratory of reckless demagogues. They next proceeded to Oldham and Manchester, where, however, they found the military drawn up to check their excesses. As the mob did not at once commit depredations the military were withdrawn, but a scene of pillage and disorder soon followed, the chief sufferers being the provision dealers and bakers. The military again marched out and fourteen of the ringleaders were taken into custody. At Birley's Mill a determined struggle took place. The rioters were first deluged with water, but as this did not compel them to disperse, some of the workpeople ascended the roof and threw pieces of iron, stones, and other missiles upon them. Many persons were very seriously hurt, and a young girl killed on the spot. From Lancashire the disaffection speedily spread into Yorkshire. On Sunday, August 14th, a large gathermg took place at Bradford Moor, under the presidency of George Bishop. Mr. Ibbotson, a well known news vendor, whose place of business was on the Bowling Green, addressed the gathering, which was estimated to number 10,000, and was followed by other speakers, stirring up the enthusiasm of the surging crowd, who received their treasonable utterances with wild cheering. The alarmed authorities summoned the chief inhabitants to meet the same evening at the Talbot Inn, when it was resolved that steps should be taken to put down the outbreak. Special constables were sworn in large numbers, and troops were sent for from Leeds. Next morning another meeting was held in front of the Oddfellows' Hall, at the early hour of seven, when it was resolved that the people should never relinquish their demands until the Charter became the law of the land. The immense crowd then formed into military order and marched up Manchester Road to Halifax, stopping all the mills and causing great excitement. Here they were joined by the Lancashire turnouts, a large number of whom were women, and many white-headed old men also appeared in the ranks. The thousands of female turnouts were looked upon with some commiseration by the well-disposed inhabitants, as many were poorly clad and not a few marching barefoot. When the Riot Act was read, and the insurgents were ordered to disperse to their homes, a large crowd of women, who stood in front of the magistrates and the military, loudly declared they had no homes, and dared them to kill them if they liked. They then struck up

THE UNION HYMN.

Oh! worthy is the glorious cause.  
Ye patriots of the union;  
Our father's rights, our father's laws  
Demand a faithful union.

A crouching dastard sure is he  
Who would not strive for liberty,  
And die to mako old England free  
From all her loud of tyranny.  
Up, brave men of the union!

Our little ones shall learn to bless  
Their fathers of the union.  
And every mother shall caress  
Her hero of the union.  
Our plains with plenty shall be crowned.  
The sword shall till the fruitful ground.  
The spear shall prune our trees around,  
To bless a nation's union.

Singing this stirriug hymn they defiantly stood in their ranks as the special constables marched up, but their music did not save them, for the constables did not hesitate to strike them with their stayes, and a melee ensued in the dispersion of the mob in considerable disorder. At Ackroyd's Mill the military were summoned to the defence and three of the rioters were shot before order could be restored.

When these stirring events were occurring I was a lad of some ten years of age, but I well remember the savage appearance of that huge crowd of men as they marched through Horton to Bradford, at the close of their day's work at Halifax. The sight was just one of those which it is impossible to forget. They came pouring down the wide road in thousands, taking up its whole breadth— a gaunt, famished looking desperate multitude, armed with huge bludgeons, flails, pitch-forks and pikes, many without coats ana hats, and hundreds upon hundreds with their clothes in rags and tatters. Many of the older men looked foot sore and weary, but the great bulk were men in the prime of life, full of wild excitement. As they marched they thundered out to a grand old tune a stirring melody, of which this was the opening stanza:—

Men of England, ye are slaves.  
Though ye "rule" the roaring "waves,"  
Though ye shout, 'From sea to sea  
Britons everywhere are free.'"

As the wild mob swept onward, terrified women brought out all their bread and other eatables, and in the hope of purchasing their forbearance, handed them to the rough-looking men who crowded to the doors and windows. A famished wretch, after struggling feebly for a share of the provisions, fell down in a fainting condition m the doorway where I was standing. A doctor, who lived close at hand, was got to the spot as soon as possible, but the man died in his presence. One of his comrades told us that the poor fellow had eaten raw potatoes at Ovenden after being without food two days; these the doctor said had killed him, "raw potatoes on an empty stomach being poison."

By this time all the towns and villages in Yorkshire were in a state of great excitement and confusion. On Tuesday, the 16th of August, a considerable mob entered Cleckheaton, and met with much opposition from the people at work in the mills. They succeeded in stopping one mill, and then went on to the works of Mr. George Anderton. Here they were gallantly opposed by the workmen within the mill, who with the assistance of a large number of the inhabitants drove them out of the millyard, and pelted them with stones until they finally expelled them from the town. On the same day mob law was put in force at Dewsbury. A large meeting was held at the Market Cross at six o'clock in the evening, after which a procession was formed, and the crowd proceeded to Batley Carr, Batley, Birstall, Littletown, and Heckmondwike. They tapped all the boilers on the way and turned out all the hands, after which another meeting was held at the Cross, at which it was stated that thirty-six boilers had been "let off." The Dewsbury shops were closed as soon as word came that the rioters were returning, and the public-houses closed at six o'clock. Next morning another gathering took place, after which the mob marched through Earlsheaton, and Horbury Bridge, coming back by way of Thornhill Lees. They had some time to wait at the colliery of Joshua Ingham, Esq., to get out the men and horses before they tapped the boilers. Here a field of turnips belonging to the Rev. Henry Torr, the rector, was nearly stripped of its produce. Another meeting was held at the Cross on their return, and it was arranged that the next muster should be held at Birstall. The shops were again closed, although it was market day. The men, who were all armed, went from house to house begging, and in many instances, if refused and only women happened to be in the house, force was resorted to. The magistrates, J. B. Greenwood and John Hague, Esqs., attended from early in the morning till late at night to swear in special constables, and many hundreds from Dewsbury, Batley, and Heckmondwike offered their services.

On Thursday morning all the factories and collieries round Dewsbury were stopped by a mob 5,000 strong. The same mob then visited Batley and stopped Bromley's and Ellis and Sons' mills, where they drew the plugs without any opposition. They then resolved to pay a second visit to Cleckheaton, to do the work they had been unable at their previous visit to accomplish, and strong parties were told off to stop the mills, collieries, etc., at Gomersal, Millbridge, and Heckmondwike. It does not appear that any opposition was offered at any of those places, and as the various mobs passed rapidly through the towns to rejoin the main body of their comrades at Cleckheaton their ranks were swelled by a large number of local chartists, who, deceived by the apparent impotence of the authorities, were persuaded that they were about to inaugurate a revolution. The time for redressing their grievances had, they were persuaded, at last arrived. The long-suffering people had risen in their strength, and by stopping all production were going to teach "the aristocrats" how completely they were dependent on the classes beneath them in the social scale, to whom they had so long denied their just political rights. Many of the men had coarse grey blankets strapped to their backs, their idea being that when they had stopped all the mills and turned out the workpeople they would march in immense bodies to London, and there put the affairs of the nation on an equitable basis. "And what would you have done?" one of them was afterwards asked, "when you had got to London?" "Done," replied the simpleton in amazement, "why we sud a taen t'nation and sattled t'national debt." Amongst the prominent local men who joined the movement was the late Isaac Clissett, a man who, however he might be misled by his political opinions at the time, proved himself afterwards a peaceful and worthy citizen. At first Clissett did not throw himself heartily into the movement, and joined at last with an honest desire to restrain the mob, but, carried away by the enthusiasm of his companions, he entered Cleckheaton in the front rank of the Heckmondwike detachment.

The first attack of the mob at Cleckheaton was on the mill of Mr. Sutcliffe Broadbent, where they were suffered to draw the plugs without any serious resistance being offered, and being joined by some of the other detachments, they proceeded in a body numbering some five or six thousand to St. Peg mill, and had withdrawn the plugs from two of the boilers when an alarm was raised that the soldiers were coming. As soon as it became known that the rioters were approaching Cleckheaton in strong force, the late Mr. Jas. Anderton, of Upper House, then a young man, rode, it is said, from Cleckheaton to Bradford in the incredibly short space of half an hour to fetch a troop of the Lancers then stationed there, but before they arrived a troop of the Yorkshire Hussars came from Leeds, where Prince George of Cambridge was acting against the insurgents. When the Yeomanry reached Cleckheaton they were joined by some hundreds of special constables, and then proceeded in a body to Peg Mill. The mob had, as we have stated, withdrawn the plugs from two of the boilers, and were proceeding to the third when they saw the soldiers defiling down the lane. Hastily massing themselves, those who were unarmed proceeded to pick up all the loose stones in the yard, while those who were armed with bludgeons, scythes, &c., were thrust to the front. The appearance of the rioters, as they somewhat unsteadily waited for the arrival of the troops, was certainly formidable, but the discipline of the little band who came to attack them more than counterbalanced the disadvantage of the great disparity of numbers. The leader of the friends of law and order called out for a halt as they neared the mob, and addressed to his men a few simple words of encouragement, appealing to their sense of duty to the throne and the peace of the realm. He then waited for the reading of the Riot Act. Before this could be done the mob advanced in disorderly fashion and threw pieces of dross at the compact mass before them, and several men were knocked senseless and bleeding from their horses. The moment was critical, as the mob, taking advantage of the confusion occasioned, were advancing with stones in their hands once more, Clissett, who was in the front rank, excitedly waving his arms and crying, "Follow me, my brave boys!" when orders were given to fire. Though this and a second volley was fired in the air, the crowd fell back in disorder, and the Yeomanry, taking advantage of the confusion, rode rapidly upon them, flourishing their sabres over their heads and striking them with the flat sides. The special constables followed up the advantage thus gained and drove the rioters towards the beck, on reaching which they scattered in all directions, some crossing the stream and others rushing into a neighbouring corn field, where they hoped by lying flat to hide from their pursuers, in a few minutes about twenty or thirty were taken into custody, and all the fields and lanes in the neighbourhood were black with wild struggling masses of human beings trying to escape from the horsemen, who rode after them flourishing their weapons. The following is a list of those taken into custody:— Chas. Leighton, (18), farmer, Gomersal; Richard Thomson (26), clothier, Gomersal; Thos. Barber (22), collier, Gomersal; David Walker (17), clothier, Bailey Carr; Chas. Brearley (32) machinist, Batley Carr; John Hay (18), collier, Hightown; Matthew Parkinson (30), dyer, Dewsbury; Josh. Holdroyd (20), raiser, Dewsbury; David Brooke (34), sawyer, Dewsbury; Joseph Farnhill (35), weaver, Dewsbury; W. Allport Bell, Dewsbury; Robert Waterson (16), no trade, Birstall; Matthew Mawson (26), collier, Birstall; J. Hodgkinson (30), weaver, Birstall; Samuel Newsome (14), clothier. Hanging Heaton; Josh. Blakeborough (39), weaver, Batley; Edward Exley (22), weaver, Earlsheaton; Wm. Wild (17), collier, Alverthorpe; and Matthew Castle, hawker, Bradford.
```



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000266/18420903/033/0007
Yorkshire Gazette - Saturday 03 September 1842

TO DO

CROWN COURT, THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 1.

"TURN OUT" RIOTS AT SKIPTON.

WILLIAM SMITH, (46), JOHN SPENCER, (50), WM. SPENCER, (47), JOHN HARLAND, (38), EDWARD HEY, (32), and JAMES DAKIN,(27), were charged with having, at Skipton, with force and arms, together with divers other evil-disposed persons, riotously and tumultuously assembled, to the great terror of the Queen's subjects.

Mr. Baines and Mr. Hall conducted the prosecution; Mr Bliss defended the prisoners.

Mr. Baines stated the case. This was a charge against the prisoners imputing to them that they had assembled at Skipton, in a formidable manner, with intent to disturb the peace, and they were also charged with a riot. This transaction arose out of the late disturbances, which had excited so great a sensation throughout this county. He should confine himself strictly to statement of the facts, merely reminding the jury that they must confine themselves to the evidence this day adduced before them. It happened that on the 16th of August last, in consequence of information which the magistrates in the Skipton district had received, they thought it necessary to swear in a great number of special constables, for which it appears there had been good reason. the afternoon a mob of about 3000 persons, consisting of men, women, and children, came into the town from the direction of Colne. They were met by the magistrates, who remonstrated with them; a parley took place, in which the defendant Smith took a very prominent part. They were armed with stakes and bludgeons; and some of the rioters wore white tape on their arms, those persons being afterwards engaged in levying money on the inhabitants. The magistrates asked Smith what was the object of their visit; he replied they had come to stop the wills from working. justices found it impossible to stop the mob from entering the tow n, and they proceeded first to the mill of Mr. Dewhurst, where they let off the water from the engine, and thus stopped the working the mill. They then went to Mr. William Sedgwick's mill, where they did the same again. The next mill they visited was Mr. John Sedgwick's, where they drew off the water from the engine, raked out the fire, and ordered the workmen to be turned out. They also threatened that if the mill was again worked without their consent they would return and do more mischief. They then asked for money, as a condition for the mob being withdrawn from the mill, on which Mr. Sedgwick asked who was leader. Smith presented himself as such, and received a sovereign from Mr. Sedgwick, who was inf .need that that was the sum they required. The mob then went through the town, conducting themselves with great violence, to the terror of the inhabitants, stopping all the mills from working. The magistrates deemed it necessary at length to read the riot act, when the mob retreated from the town, having levied money and provisions from the inhabitants. The mob took the road towards Carlton and Colne, where they halted in a field. The riot act was again read, and the civil power being wholly inadequate, the military was called upon to disperse them; the soldiers cnarged the mob, and drove them the lane, from which great numbers stones were thrown by the rioters, and Mr.Garforth, oue of the magistrates, was seriously hurt. Witnesses were called to prove these facts. The prisoner Smith, it appeared, had taken a very active part. He met the magistrates at the parley, superintended the mob, handed the weapon to the boy which the boiler was tapped at Sedg wick's mill, and ordered the mill to be kept standing until the delegates at Manchester bad determined the rate of wages; he also received the sovereign from Mr. Sedgwick, and in every particular took general superintendence. The prisoner Way Spencer.it was proved.ordered the men to be firm and stand still, when the soldiers were brought out to disperse them; he was also observed in the crowd, stopping the mills, and was in the lane throwing stones. Dakin was proved to have been engaged in throwing stones at the special constables, and John Speacc was throwing stones in the Market-place and also in the lane. The counsel lor the prosecution declined offering any evidence against Harland and Hey, who were acquitted. Mr. Bliss addressed the jury for the defendants. He appeared uot there to justify riots and disturbances; he entreated the jury not be led away by the statements in the public papers that a great and dangerous sedition was brewing, of which this was only the beginning. Taking the naked facts of this case it appeared that a mob of three thousand, in a state of actual starvation, begging their bread—had entered the town; that town was at their mercy, but not the slightest injury was done, either person or property, except the letting out of water from the boilers of a few engines. He contended that the /manner in which Smith had led on the mob was creditable, and that his good management was owing the safety of the town. He could not justify the act of turning out the hands from the mills, but this was rather to be attributed busy demagogues and factious journalists, who had encouraged acts which they had had the baseness to instigate, but not the courage to participate in. Mr. Justice Maule summed up. If the practice was to be permitted stopping mills until the delegates at Manchester permitted work to be resumed, —if that was the way in which things were to on, there would be an end to any government, except the self-constituted government at Manchester. The conduct of the magistrates in this case had been most proper and commendable; they had very properly dispersed this most illegal assembly, and had so managed matters, that no person in the crowd had been maimed. The necessity for reading the riot act could not be doubted, when so gross violence was being committed, as the stopping of mills, and thus infringing upon the liberty of the subject and the right of property. Any person who "had joined the mob by whom these illegal acts were perpetrated, although they might not be proved to have taken an active part, still by their presence they rendered themselves responsible to the law. The jury retired, and after being absent for about half hour, found all the prisoners Guilty GEORGE EMMETT, WILLIAM EMMETT, WM WARD, JOB ATKINSON, GEORGE ATKINSON* DAVID HODGSON, and JOSEPH CROMACK, were' charged with a riot and assault, in resisting George Acton sheriff's officer, from executing a writ of fi. fa. evidence was offered the prosecution, and a verdict Not Guiity was recorded.

THE HUDDERSFIELD RIOTS.

JONATHAN FROST (60), WTLLIAM HOLROYD, (27), W ILLIAM WOODHEAD, (34), and JOSEPH SHEARD, (34), were charged with conspiring together for an alteration in the scale of wages, and with going about in an illegal manner to compel the mill-owners to submit to their terms, and with having compelled Henry Kershaw and others to leave their employment force and intimidation, and with conducting themselves in a riotous and tumultuous manuer. Mr. Baines and Mr. Hall conducted the prosecution; the prisoners were undefended. Mr. Baines stated the case. The charge against the defendants was that they had met in the town of Huddersfield, in a riotous manner, with various intents—principally that they did so stop the mills, and thus compel the masters to agree to certain terms which they dictated. This was beyond doubt illegal proceeding, and if they met a tumultuous manner I enforce this conspiracy then •«« . riot. The facts were tha, great number of people came from a distant ar ' h 5 across the border from *n>el tl ' ered Huddersfield to stop their work, mill Mr. m. Brook, an extensive manufacturer and «„«. the magistrates of the West-riding. They saw Brook Slated their object; remonstrated, when they told him'that if his mill was not stopped on the Mouday they would compel him to put out his fires, and pull his mill down. They said they wanted a fair day's wage for a fair day's work, to "which Mr. Brook replied that his men were satisfied, and it was improper for them interfere. On the Monday, Mr. Brook re. sumed his works as usual, but about twelve o'clock it was deemed necessary to stop the eugiue, and the engineer Kershaw, was left on the premises, to take charge of them. About half-past four o'clock a large mob, numbering about ten thousand, entered the towu, the foremost ranks being armed with large bludgeons, which they brandished in a menacing manner, as they passed the George Inn, where the magistrates were assembled. They again proceeded to Mr. Brook's mill, where they demanded admission, and required to know if the works were standing. Woodhead acted as leader, and insisted going into the mill himself and inspecting the engine, observing that he understood these matters. Whilst Wood head was so engaged and the mob were waiting for his return, Mr. Brook arrived with the military, and entering the premises, Mr. Brook collared Woodhead himself and gave him into the custody of the special constables, by whom he was taken to the George Inn. Soon after he was taken into custody, the prisoner Holroyd went to the gaol, supposing Woodhead to be there. He was at the head of a detachment of about 200 men, and knocking at the door asked if there was any prisoner there. The gaoler slid there were none of the rioters in the prison, but Holroyd insisted on seeing over the gaol, which the keeper was obliged to submit to. After being satisfied, the party went away, Holroyd observing that if they had found any their people they would have pulled the place down and murdered the gaoler, Holroyd had also been boasting to one of the Lancers that he sent his lads on Saturday, but tiiis day (Monday) he had come himself. Almost immediately after the attack on the gaol another detachment of the mob went to the door of the George Inn. There the prisoner Frost was particularly prominent The magistrates were there engaged in hearing the cases prisoners who had been taken into custody. The mob broke open the door, and the prisoner was one of those who forced himself into the passage, armed with a stick, along with several other persons, beating and striking at the constables. The mob assumed so serious an aspect that the riot act had to be read, and the military were called out and charged the mob, order to clear the street. Brook and a number of other persons proved these facts. The prisoners in defence denied that they had taken active part in the riots, but admitted having been with the i mob in the different places proved the witnesses. Mr. Justice Macle having summed up, the jury found the prisoners Guilty, except Sheard, against whom evidence was offered. • JOSHPH SHEARD was then indicted for a conspiracy, along with other persons, for raising the scale of wages, and with stopping the mills of Messrs Haigh and Company, of Colue Bridge, making a riot and distance to the great terror of the Queen's subjects. Mr. and Mr. Hall were for the prosecution. Mr. Haigh, of the firm of Thomas Haigh and Co., of Colne Bridge, proved that he was at their mills on Tuesday, the of August, when a large mob came their premises. About or 400 men entered the yard and a considerable number remained outside. They ordered the mill to be stopped, and witness said they had had difference with their hands and he thought was not right they should be required to stop. Some men then went into the boiler-house and raked out the fires. They then looked for the plug; witness said there was not one, but rather than have any damage he would let the Wats off. Another party of men put down the shuttles and thus stopped the supply of water. Sheard got on an eminence and addressed the people. He said they were to march six abreast like soldiers, and to go to Bradley Quarry and stop the hands, and then to Mirfield and Dewsbury. Witness afterwards saw the steam let oft at Bradley Quarry. The prisoner, when called for his defeuce, implored for mercy; he had never been a court before, and he was very sorry for what he had done. The jury 1 >und the prisoner Guilty.

PETER FOX, (26), was charged with having riotously and tumultuously assembled, with divers other persons, tor increasing the rate of wages, and with having entered the mill of Joseph Lister and his partners, and with having used threats and menaces, and stopped the engine. Mr. Wilkins and Mr. Overend conducted the prosecution. On Tuesday, the 16th of August, about half-past eleven o'clock, a great crowd of entered the town of Brigbouse, and went from mill to mill, drawing the plugs and stopping the engines. At last they went to the Victoria mill, which belong d to Mr. Firth and was occupied by Mr. Lister and some other parties. They demanded that this mill should stopped, and proceeded to knock out the plugs. One of the boilers could not be tapped, and the engineer refused to let off the steam, when the prisoner mounted ladder and opened the steam-valve, letting out the steam, and thus stopping the engine. He then threw down a weight of about lbs. to the boiler which was seriously injured. The facts were clearly proved, and although the prisoner denied being oue of the party the evidence was conclusive against him. He was found Guilty. The prisoner was then indicted for having stopped the mill Mr. Anderson, Cleckheaton, and it was proved that Fox was very active, urging the people to draw the plug of the engine.—Guilty. Sir G. Lewin conducted the prosecution. It was stated that the prisoner had been tried for highway robbery at the present assizes, and that he had been nineteen times in prison. JOHN LOCKWOOD, (37), HENRY SCOTT, (25), EDWIN BROOK, (20), WALTER BROOK. (16), THOMAS HAMER, (21), JOSEPH EASTWOOD, (23), and THOMAS VICKERMAN, (27), were charged with, having, on the 16th August last, at the parish of Kirkheaton, with force and arms, together with divers other evildisposed persons, unlawfully and riotously assembled to disturb the and with stopped the mill of Jacob Wood and Company. Sir Gregory Lewin conducted the prosecution; the prisoners were defended Mr. Wilkins. The facts were somewhat similar to those narrated in the preceding cases. It appeared that on the day in quest ioe the prisoners went to the mill of the prosecutor, and attempt to draw the plug tho boiler, which in the first instance they conld not succeed in getting out, when they used language of very threatening nature to what they would do if they did not show them where the plug, was and how to get it out.— Eventually they stopped the mill, and on going away threatened that they would pull down the whole building if they returned and found the mill at work, without word from them granting leave to do so. After the case had been partly gone into the prisoners, under the advice of Mr. Wilkins, withdrew their plea, and pleaded Guilty.—Sentence deferred.

THOMAS POLLARD, (20), was charged with having, on the 13th of August last, at Halifax, entered a certain mill, the property of Win. Inchcliffe, and injured a certain boiler, his property. Sir Gregory Lewin was for the prosecution , Guilty. ..... WILLIAM SMITH, (34), was charged with having, on the lflth of August last, at Halifax, committed a riot, and entered the premises of Joseph Hinehcliff-, and a certain outlet or shu tie of a reservoir, his property. Sir Gregory Lewin the prosecution. This was riot committed by another section of the same party as the last case, and their conduct was equally violent and outrageous. answer to questions put to them they said they wanted higher wages, and the charter they would have, and if they set the mill to work before they g-t leave from them they would come and burn down uC wnote omitting. The mill was situated at Cragg, near Halifax. Guilty. 

JAMES RAMSDEN, (21), ALEXANDER SYKES, (25), and GEORGE SYKES, (21), were charged with having, on the 17th August, at Batley, committed a riot and obstructed Messrs. George and Charles Crowther, cloth manufacturers, in the conduct and management of their business.

Mr. Overend was for the prosecution. The prosecutors in this case are cloth manufacturers at Churwell, near Leeds, and the prisoners resided at the time in question in the neighbourhood, and they were observed foremost in the riot there committed. The mill was stopped, and the plugs of the boilers taken out— The jury retired to consider their verdict.— Guilty. Recommended to mercy on account of their previous good character.

JOSEPH EXLEY, (20), was charged with having committed a riot on the 16th of August last, and entered the premises of John Starkey, and his partners, at Liversedge, and stopped the machinery, their property.

Sir G. Lewin was for the prosecution. The prosecutors are extensive woollen manufacturers at Huddersfield and they have also an establishment at Mill Bridge, in Liversedge, which is about seven miles from Huddersfield, and on the day in question a large concourse of people assembled there, and stopped the mill by tapping the boilers. The prisoner was identified as a leader in the transaction.— Guilty.




--

https://www.cravenherald.co.uk/nostalgia/nostalgia_history/10942805.riots-fights-and-gunfire-at-mills-over-automated-machinery/

Glenn Koppany has a copy