# Events 1815


Libel trial of Charles Sutton publisher of the Nottingham Review


Libellous letter

https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2014/10/5th-october-1814-letter-from-general.html

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0001100/18141014/029/0003?browse=true
Nottingham Review - Friday 14 October 1814

GENERAL LUDD.
To THE EDITOR OF THE NOTTINGHAM REVIEW.

SIR—I take the liberty of dropping you a few lines to inform you of the good fortune of one of my sons, who is come to very high honour. You must know that some time ago, owing to a little imprudent conduct, my eldest son, NED, decamped, and enlisted into his Majesty's service, and as he was noted for *heroism and honourable enterprize*, he was entrusted with a commission to exercise his prowess against the Americans, and I am happy to say he has acquitted himself in a way which will establish his fame to generations yet unborn.

I assure you Mr. Editor, I scarcely know how to keep my feelings within bounds, for while all our former and united efforts in breaking frames, &c. were commented upon with some severity, and in a way which cast an odium upon my character and that of my family. I now find the scales are turned, and our enemies are converted into friends; they sing a new tune to an old song, and the mighty deeds of my son are trumpeted forth in every loyal paper in the kingdom. My son is not now confined to the breaking a few frames, having the sanction of government, he can now not only wield his great hammer to break printing presses and types, but he has a licence to set fire to places and property which he deems obnoxious, and now and then even a little *private pillage* is winked at. Even the GAZETTE EDITOR at Mr. Topman's who was formerly one of my greatest enemies, and threatened to pursue both me and my family to the uttermost, is now in my favor, and is become a patron, and an admirer of my son, on account of his achievements in Washington. There is one thing though in the conduct of this Gentleman which has created me some little uneasiness; a few weeks ago he strongly recommended to the magistrates to offer a very large reward, to any person who would disclose our secret system of operation in this neighbourhood; he went so far as to say 5,000*l.* ought to be offered; enough he said to enable the informer to live independent in another country, intimating such a character would not be considered as a proper person for the society of this country, and therefore he would emigrate to seek other associates. I hope it is not true that this notorious Editor has any secrets to disclose about me and my family, and that he is waiting for this large reward to be offered, that he may avail himself of such an opportunity of making his fortune, and fleeing his country. Now, I really think, as my son is become truly loyal, and is working for his country's good, and all under the sanction of the Crown, and as his achievements have been of the first rate, "old grievances ought not to be repeated;" though, bye the bye, I am of opinion that all which I and my son have done in Nottingham and neighbourhood, is not half so bad as what my son has done in America, but then you know he has supreme orders, from indisputable authority, for his operations in America, and that makes all the difference.

I am, Sir, your obedient servant,  
GENERAL LUDD.

*Ludd Hall,* October 5, 1814.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0001100/18141021/035/0004
Nottingham Review - Friday 21 October 1814

The Proprietor of the NOTTINGHAM REVIEW, is *exceedingly sorry* to find that an article which appeared in his last Number has given disgust to some of his friends, who have conceived it as having a tendency to encourage the spirit of insubordination and outrage, which has been so long prevalent in this neighbourhood, and which no man laments more than himself. He will not multiply words upon the subject. *He knows his own intentions, and he knows that nothing could possibly be further from his thoughts, either in that article or in any other, which at any time may have appeared in the Review.*


response:

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001099/18141028/014/0003
Nottingham Gazette - Friday 28 October 1814

The Proprietor of the Nottingham Review, is sorry find that an article which appeared in his last Number has given DISGUST to some of his friends, who have conceived it having a tendency to encourage the spirit of insubordination and outrage, which has been so long prevalent in this neighbourhood, and which no man laments more than himself. He will not multiply words upon the subject. *He knows his own intentions, and he knows that nothing could possibly be further from his thoughts, either in that article or in any other, which at any time may have appeared in the Review.* — Nottingham Review of October 21.

Still under the impressions of horror which the atrocious proceedings at Basford have excited, we are almost unable to keep within due bounds our indignation at those who have caused the perpetration of so so much guilt. Error and misrepresentation, though baneful in their immediate operation, and subversive of all order—productive of all mischief—in their ultimate effects, are at first slow in their progress, and generally require a long period to render the minds of men ripe for the production of their most terrible consequences. If their progress, however, be at first slow, it for the most part advances, if the arts of delusion continue to be practised, with a steady and continually accelerating force, till having completely destroyed the perception of right and wrong, and created disciples to whom evil only is their good, ail kinds of monstrous and evil doings begin to abound, and robbery and assassination, civil discord and misery, are the fearful offspring of the follies of mankind, and the dreadful scourges of their sins. That this dishonoured district is rapidly verging to so lamentable a state, is too evident from the character of some late events. The Luddites, more and more inured to crime by each of their operations, become after each more and more bold and atrocious. They have now plunged into that abyss of guilt, that there is no deed of villainy too black for their perpetration. Audacious and criminal as their proceedings have hitherto been, we must now be doubly on our guard, and expect from them atrocities of still more alarming and criminal aspect. The men who have proceeded from illegal combinations to the destruction of property, from acts of destruction to robbery, and from robbery to assassination, have advanced so far in wickedness that they must continue to go forward; and, the temptations to crime being so numerous, we must expect them to commence the pillage of private houses, as well as that of the frame-shops, and murder and robbery on the highways, as well as the assassination of their employers. And whom have we to thank for this alarming state of things? Who shall be loaded with the heavy responsibility of al this guilt — the horrid distinction of pre-eminence amongst the wicked — of having been the origin, the root and source of so much evil? Who is it to whom the guilt of blood — the ruin of hundreds of families — and the indignation of a disgraced community ought to be attached? Surely, if the serpent can be discovered, all men will join in the work of his extermination. 

 TO DO Mercy herself cannot make one -.nt-'rres«on lev the roouster, but loudly demands i.is trifice. i hat there must have been extraordinary lo’-g continued stem of delusion practised, before the unrids the Luddites leave lje< n brought their present awful state of depravity, is evident. Other classes of manufacturers, duicrent parts of the country, have suffered much, if not much more, the continuance the late war, than framework-knitters; and yet every other part of Great Britain has remained perfectly tranquil, undisgraceful the atrocities which alone are doomed deplore. In every quarter but this, her manufacturers have, with a spirit worthy then country, and almost without a murmur, borne their share of the struggle iu which ail ranks were engaged, and in which nearly ali have more less suffered. To what peculiar causes, then, are ttace the organization of Luddism? The manufacturers Nottingham have in themselves greater tendency to depravity than the other manufacturers of the kingdom. The pressing difficulties of the times have acted equally on all; and, unless some other cause—some extraordinary stimulus to evil, had been brought into operation, more than the same effects must have been produced here which have been observable elsewhere. Whence then, has this extraordinary stimulus proceeded Have the framework-knitters hem called together any popular declaimers, and exhorts d set the laws of - -n.l and their country at defiance? Have they been misled from the pulpit, or stimulated to outrage the diffusion amongst them of inflammatory addresses? None of these instruments have been employed for their delusion and destruction; but they have been constantly and insidiously acted upon by the vilest print that ever stained its columns with incentives to wickedness. The NOTTINGHAM REVIEW is the extraordinary cause, the organ riot a disaffection—the parent and champion Luddism—which has rendered the manufacturers Nottingham so distinguished in guilt above their fellows. continually under the laws the land winch they live; slandering the Government whose wisdom and firmness preserved them and their sons from the remorseless fang- foreign tyrant; inculcating for years, with unwearied and ceaseless perseverance, that they are the unpitied victims a corrupt and profligate system of administration, eager to reduce them the rank brutes, and delighting to w ring from them, for its own ambitious and unhallowed purposes, the hard-earned fruits of their labours; that they are treated, and always have been treated, worse than tile vilest slaves of the most oppressed and despised countries; that their very employers have combined for their ruin, and have been striving withhold from them such prices for their labour their trade can afford to pay; that the land of their birth has become unworthy its MiMr and unfit for them to inhabit; and that the British mechanic has the world before him, emigration to any part which will he exchange for the better; for in all other countries, however wretched they may be, and however much beneath our own in intelligence, in wealth, or in freedom, the industrious labourer will supplied in tint nuance with rewards and comforts which cannot hope to receive to enjoy here!! Miserable as are these mis-statements and perversions, they have unhappily been too productive of evil—too fatal their consequences, to be treated with contempt. Taught to believe that the laws of his country afford protection, no redress, for him, the frame-breaker refuses them, as a necessary const quonce, his obedience. Viewing himself the victim of oppression the one hand, and the mere tool of avaricious and unfeeling eraplorers the other, is led to attempt intimidation of th» Government by setting its officers and the laws of the lajjd defiance, and to dictate his own unreasonable terms to his master, the destruction of his property, and the dread, or rather the actual perpetration of every species of outrage and of assassination II! Liberty the Press, thou dearest and most invaluable birthright of Englishmen, how many evils, arise from the licentiousness with which thou art sometimes abused ! —The Editor of the *Nottingham Review* himself is at length alarmed at the magnitude of the mischiefs to which his noxious publication has given rise. acknowledges that the inflammatory articles in his paper have at length excited the DISGUST" (what an unlucky word to use) of his friends! But how difficult will it lie for him to extricate himself from the consequences of his wickedness or his folly, and to throw from him the |>oiiderous responsibility he has incurred in the sight of God and of man. He has licen compelled acknowledge that even his own friends are at length disgusted the flagrant wickedness of his paper; but has not the manliness to acknowledge that their indignation against him has been properly directed. With the last evasion of the cowardly and the vile, he affects to astonished that the article signed General Ludd has been found have tendency to encourage the spirit of insubordination and outrage in the town and neighbourhood,’’ and, poor innocent soul! though now for the first time convinced of it by the displeasure of his friends and the loss of their support, "he knows Ills " osgi intentions, and he knows that nothing could possibly be further from his thoughts, either in that "article, or in any other which at any time have appeared in the Review." Pitiful and sneaking this attempt at apology is, can its wiiter be so weak as to hope bis assertion will believed Could any man but himself have the effrontery to assert, that he had no intention to stimulate the Luddites, when told them (to say nothing of all the rest of his long catalogue of inflammatory assertions) that the only difference between their conduct and that of our troops in America, consisted in the latter having the authority of Government for their enormities ! and when plainly stated to them that they might safely on in their outrageous proceedings, because the man who should give information against them would an unfit associate for any class of persons in this country. Not only is it impossible that such an absurdity could be credited, but the very paragraph in which it is advanced contains internal evidence of the falsehood the flimsy covering endeavours to throw over his misconduct. "He is sorry to find," he tells us, that an article which appeared in his last number has given disgust to some of his friends; but knows that nothing could further from his intention than to encourage outrage either in that article, or in any other which may at any time have appeared the Review!" Now why this allusion to any other article? His friends, he says, complained but of the one. Why, then, did he imagine it necessary to apologize for more than he was accused of? Why? Because he felt conscious that there had been many others which were well calculated excite disgust well it, and because, while he hypocritically disavowed any evil intention in the publication the one, this consciousness rose upon him, oml he feared his falsehood would not answer his purpose unless it included denial all his "itilt, iioth that with which he was charged, and that was only presented to him by the goading recollections of his own overburthened conscience! Painful as it is thus to trample on a fallen enemy, it is disagreeable duty we feel ourselves bound to perform. We have declared interminable hostility the principles the Nottingham Review, widely different as they are from those mere opposition to the C>oyerr.inent on some points, which many a good subject and many an honest man may conscientiously to entertain. The political principles of the Review are the principles of anarchy and insurrection; and its influence the moral principles its ignorant and misguided readers, has been acknowledged to in the highest degree pernicious by the very friends of the proprietor and editor, through his own medium. cannot therefore Ipse any opportunity of acceleratiag its downfall. have said that the editor himself length alarmed at the magnitude the evils the Review has produced. Justly, indeed, may he alarmed at what now hope to remedy. But his alarm, fear, is at the which have attached to himself, not at the calamities he has brought upon others. For his own private interests, he has he *"so long flattered the malignant passions of the populace,"* and for his own private interests it is, that he has turned his back upon those whom he has led astray. May God rescue them from the dreadful gulf into which the *Review* has plunged them, and continue to shield those who have not yet been deluded by it from His ways, from the future contagion of its pestiferous influence.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001100/18150728/018/0003
Nottingham Review - Friday 28 July 1815

Nottingham Assize Intelligence

...

TO DO - extensive

https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2015/07/22nd-july-1815-trial-of-charles-sutton.html


Mocked by Leeds Intelligencer, likening it to the Leeds Mercury "Nottingham Review (the Luddite and Buonapartean Mercury of that town)"

https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2015/08/7th-august-1815-leeds-intelligencer.html

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000205/18160209/007/0002
Leicester Journal - Friday 09 February 1816

LAW INTELLIGENCE

COURT OF KING'S BENCH. FEBRUARY 1st.

*The King v. Sutton.*

The Defendant in this case was convicted at the Assizes for Nottingham, before Mr. Baron Graham, of having inserted in *The Nottingham Review*, of which he is the Printer and Proprietor, a seditious and inflammatory libel, signed with the name of a certain imaginary personage (General Ludd,) reflecting on his Majesty's Government, and on the conduct of the British troops in America at the time the libel was written. At the tme of the trial, certain innuendoes were introduced into the indictment, setting forth, that at the period when the libel was written, great outrages had been committed by divers ill disposed persons on the property and persons of various individuals in and about the neighbourhood of Nottingham; and that the supposed Leader of the disaffected was a certain imaginary person, called Edward Ludd.—At the trial, it was contended by the defending Counsel, first, that the article charged as libellous was only a fair political discussion on political measures; and, secondly, that the averment in the indictment, setting forth that disturbances had and did exist in Nottingham and its neighbourhood, were not sufficiently made out by evidence. These objections, however, were over-ruled by the Learned Judge; who, in his address to the Jury, said, they, from their own local knowledge, could not be ignorant that in fact disturbances had existed; and by the knowledge they thus possessed, would serve to give credit to the evidence of the witnesses examined, and render official documents unnecessary.

The Jury, without hesitation, found the defendant—*Guilty.*

Mr, Denmnan, on the part of the defendant, had since applied for and obtained a rule for a new trial, on the two first grounds, and the additional one of mis-direction on the part of the Learned Judge, who, he contended, had directed the Jury that they were at liberty to impart their own knowledge into the case, as operating against the defendant.

The Attorney General, Mr. Sergeant Vaughan, and Mr. Reader, this day argued against the rule being made absolute.

On the part of *he defendant, Mr. Denman and Mr. Phillips repeated all their former arguments in support of the rule.

The Court, however, were of opinion were no grounds for a new trial. The rule was, therefore, discharged, and the defendant will be brought up for judgement in the course of the Term.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001659/18160216/043/0004
Drakard's Stamford News - Friday 16 February 1816

TRIALS, ACCIDENTS, OFFENCES, &c.

COURT OF KING'S BENCH, Feb. 9.

The King v. Charles Sutton.—On the motion of the Attorney-general this defendant was brought up to receive the sentence of the court for printing avd publishing a libel in the *Nottingham Review*, in form of a letter signed General Ludd.

Several affidavits were put in on the behalf of the defendant, in mitigation of punishment, which represented him to have published the libel in question from an error in judgment; that he was an excellent son, husband, and father, and a well-disposed subject.

Mr. Denman and Mr. Phillips addressed the court on behalf of the defendant, contending that the letter in question was no more than a free commentary upon the conduct of the government; and that it was no more than the exercise of the right which belonged to every inhabitant of this fine country.

The Attorney-general addressed the court in aggravation, contending that the libel had a most mischievous tendency at the time when it was published, being just after the termination of the recent disgraceful outrages in the town of Nottingham and its neighbourhood.

The court, viewing all the circumstances of the case, sentenced the defendant to one year’s imprisonment in the gaol of Nottingham; and at the expiration of that period to find security for his good behaviour for three years, himself in £500, and two sureties to £250 each.

