
# Events, 1816

Frame breaking was to continue in Nottinghamshire in 1816, In June, frames were broken in New Radford — several of which were owned by a certain Mr. B. — Benjamin — Topham, the same Topham whose frames were broken in December 1811



---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002257/18160616/006/0003
The News (London) - Sunday 16 June 1816

PROVINCIAL NEWS

THE LUDDITES

We are informed that the Luddites in the vicinity of Nottingham have again resumed their mischievous practices of frame-breaking. The following is an extract of a letter from Nottingham, dated Sunday last, on this unpleasant subject:—

"I am sorry to inform you, that the system of frame-breaking recommenced this morning about two o'clock: nineteen lace-frames were broken at New Radford, near this town, working to Waynman; nine of them were his own, the rest belonging to different people. The cause assigned for destroying these frames is, that he had just sold nine to the workmen, to be worked out by stopping one-third of the work. There was an armed party, upwards of thirty, and sentinels placed at different avenues, whilst the work of destruction went forward. I have just seen W————, and, from what he says, there are great hopes they will be found out; but one of our magistrates has behaved very ill, in refusing to grant a warrant, being Sunday. There will be no security for property in our business, or any other, until the law is clearly defined, that the county, hundred, or district, *shall* make good all property wantonly or maliciously destroyed: and as the system is spreading to so many parts of the kingdom, we are surprised that the Home Secretary of State should not see it would take away every motive of revenge against personal property."

---


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000237/18160614/012/0003
Stamford Mercury - Friday 14 June 1816

*Widely syndicated*

The system of frame-breaking re-commenced in the neighbourhood of Nottingham on Sunday morning about two o'clock; nineteen lace-frames were broken at New Radford working for Mr. Waynman: nine of them were his own, the rest belonging to different people. The cause assigned for destroying these frames is, that he had just sold nine to the workmen, to be worked out by stopping one third of the work. There was an armed party of upwards of thirty ruffians, and sentinels were placed at different avenues whilst the work of destruction went forward.— A magistrate of Nottingham is charged in the London papers with most extraordinary conduct, in refusing to grant a warrant against some persons believed to be part of the offenders, because it was Sunday!


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000172/18160615/026/0004

1/12/1811 http://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2011/12/1st-december-1811-derbyshire-luddites.html 

7/12/1811
http://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2011/12/7th-december-1811-luddites-return-to.html

Summarised: http://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2011/12/22nd-december-1811-william-milnes.html

7/3/1812 http://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2012/03/7th-march-1812-derbyshire-luddites.html


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001316/18160703/002/0002
Evening Mail - Wednesday 03 July 1816

The manufacturing labourers in Nottingham and its vicinity, we are sorry to say, have often betrayed a greater impatience of temporary misfortune than others of their station in life. For this unhappy disposition they are indebted to the prevalence of democratic and disorganizing principles among their neighbours of somewhat superior rank and education. In this part of the country the desperate conspiracy of the Luddites took its rise. A gang of similar miscreants, we are informed, entered the premises of Mr. Heathcote, at Loughborough, on Saturday last, for the avowed purpose of breaking to pieces the whole of his lace-machinery, on account of having learnt that this gentleman intended to reduce the price of labour. The villains were all disguised, and mostly armed. The first person they met was the guard, stationed according to nightly custom watch and protect the property. Him they ordered to lie down with his face to the ground, and not to observe their motions or molest them at his peril. The guard, being faithful to his trust, refused to obey, and was shot dead immediately. Mr. Heathcote employed two sets of men—one to work night, and the other day. Twelve of the latter were at work, whom the murderers seized, and commanded instantly to fall their faces: the men, with the recent example of cruelty before their eyes, did not hesitate to obey; and in the course of one hour from that time these ruffians destroyed, in machinery and goods, property to the amount of 15,000l.


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002646/18160716/019/0003
Star (London) - Tuesday 16 July 1816

Discontents.— We have not this week to record any fresh outrages in the midland counties;—but very great and serious alarm is excited at the long continued existence, in the very heart of the kingdom, of that secret association known by the nameof the *Luddites*, whose destructive operations the utmost vigilance of the Executive has not been able to prevent. What excites, perhaps, more alarm than any thing else, is the excellence of their organization, which could not be exceeded by the most regular military force. At the late outrage at Loughborough, independently of the supposed number of nearly 30, who were  actively concerned in committing these excesses in the interior of the factory, it is confidently believed that there were not less than 50 or 60 others stationed on the outside, in the manner of sentinels or patroles, in every direction, and even along the Mill-street, to within a very few yards of the market place of Loughborough. Some of these patroles called aloud, warning, the inhabitants to keep in their beds, and not to exhibit any lights.—(Carlisie Journal.)

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000172/18160706/026/0004
Leicester Chronicle - Saturday 06 July 1816

LOUGHBOROUGH FRAME-BREAKING

We have this week the painful task of recording an outrage of the frame-breakers, which, very far, exceeds any thing of the kind that has ever before happened, since enormities of this description first spread terror amongst us in March, 1811; and , well-aware, from the rumours that have been afloat for several days, that our readers would feel the utmost anxiety to learn the particulars of this deplorable catastrophe, we have spared no pains in endeavouring to satisfy them as much as we possibly could, *"neither extenuating, nor setting down aught in malice."* About a quarter-post twelve o'clock, on Friday night, or rather on Saturday morning last, a number of men, perhaps about thirty, some of whom were armed and disguised entered a small room, called the casting shop, immediately attached to the rear part Messrs. Heathcoat and  Boden's lace-factory, (formerly Mr Douglass's worsted factory,) situate directly at the entrance into the town of Loughborough from Ashby-de-la-Zouch. In this small room were John Asher, Thomas Hyman, and John Wehsler, three of the men belonging to the factory, the former of whom snatched up a pistol, (kept in the room for the purpose of defence), and pointed it at the Luddites, as they were coming in at the door, but it did not go off. Some one them, in return, instantly fired at Asher, apparently with a blunderbuss, and wounded him in the back of his head, which either caused him to fall, or he was otherwise knocked down. Hyman, being also at the same moment laid prostrate by his side, and Webster, who got out of doors, in the confusion, to try to escape, was quickly brought back again and placed along-side of his two companions. Sufficient guards were then put over the three, and the residue of the gang, with lights their bands, proceeded, without loss of time, through the large room, called the setting up room, to the bottom of the stair-case, where meeting with a youth named Ambrose Woodford, they knocked down, placed a guard over him. as they had done to the others, and then rushed up stairs into the first floor, which is divided into three parts, or shops, containing altogether twenty-three frames, the whole whereof they broke to pieces, having previously secured, in one of the said three shops, James Powel, (commonly called uncle,) William Soars, and John North, in the same manner as their companions below. Ned's band then directed their attention to the large room above, in which were thirty frames and five men, viz. Joseph Sherwin, Samuel Street, William Squires, John Langham, and, Thomas Smith, the first of whom expressed to his associates, a determination to resist the entrance of the invaders into their room, which determination was probably overhead by the latter, for they advanced to the foot the stairs with terrific boldness, a stern voice calling out, *"advance with the blunderbusses—more blunderbusses here."* Sherwin's comrades, now fearing that his opposition might endanger the lives of the whole five, prevailed upon him to change his intention. and let them come quietly, which they then did without delay. No sooner was this accomplished, than the said five were imperiously commanded to prostrate themselves with their faces to the floor, and not to look about them lest death should he their portion, and at the same time guards were fixed over them, as in the former instances of the like nature. This preliminaty being settled, demolition itself was then let loose, and to it went the furies.

After toiling for the space of perhaps seven or eight minutes, they all stopped on a sudden, as if to listen whe-all was right below,—the strictest silence reigned for a few seconds: and afterwards one of them vociferated, *All's well, Ned Ludd do your duty well— its a Waterloo job by G—d,"* when instantly they renewed the work of havock as before, and continued it also for about the same space of time, thus finishing the destructive scene, except their breaking two incomplete frames, in the setting-up room, as they returned through it upon their retreat. Just before quitting the upper room, one of the Luddites said aloud to his comrades, *"Ned go round and see that you have done your duty well,"* and almost immediately afterwards, the prostrate five were thus addressed, *"Now men, if you can tell us of any machines that are working under price if it be one or hundred miles off, we will go and break them."* Receiving a negative to this question, they directly quitted the factory, enjoining the men belonging to it, with terrible threats, not to stir for the space of ten minutes, and offering to shake hands with Asher, the wounded man; telling him withal that they hoped he would soon get better, or words to that effect; and we are happy to inform the public that he is now quite out of danger, and fast approaching complete recovery. They have not only thus destroyed the machines, but even the lace that happened to be upon the respective rollers is mostly hacked to pieces. In one instance they tore it away and set fire to it upon the floor, the flames whereof coming near to Street, he shifted a little; whereupon one of them gave him a kick, and bid him lie still as the fire would not hurt him; Squires too, who once rather changed his position to avoid danger, received a violent blow near his left eye; and Langham, and North were likewise struck from somewhat similar motives. In fact, it seemed a particular maxim with them, as we have before remarked, the deterring as much as possible any one from having a glimpse of their proceedings. Independent of the supposed number of nearly thirty who were actively committing these excesses in the interior of the factory, it is confidently believed that there were not less than fifty or sixty others stationed on the outside in the manner of sentinels or patroles, in every direction, and even along the Mill-street, to within a few yards of the very Market place of the town. Some of these patroles called aloud, warning the inhabitants to keep in their beds, and not to exhibit any lights; in disobedience of which, one person, who endeavoured to go out amongst them, had eight panes directly broken, in one of his windows, and was threatened with death if he did not keep within. About a dozen panes were also broken in the windows of the factory.

According to the best information we can collect, this daring outrage occupied the space of about forty minutes, and some of the neighbours go so far as to say that the posse were headed by a man on horseback, who halted his men, and called over his *numerical* list, when they had quitted the premises about 200 yards, as if to ascertain if any were missing; and that shortly afterwards several shots were fired; either denoting triumph, or by way of defiance as they eventually marched away. We have not heard of any thing having been carried off except some fire arms belonging to the factory. On the other hand, we understand, they left two of their own ramrods behind them. It is very difficult, at present, to form any estimate of the amount of the damages, even by the proprietors themselves; we have however been told, by an experienced workman, that he thinks each of the fifty-three complete frames will require, on an average, 80*l.* to put them in the same state again; this, of course, would make 4240*l.*—to which if we add, 60*l.* more, for the injury to the two incomplete frames to make round numbers, the account would then stand at 4300*l.* Thus, even admitting it to be any thing near the truth, a serious sum; and yet, it is scarcely worth mentioning in comparison with the general loss: in the first place to the firm by the great delay to their business, whilst the frames are repairing; and to the next place, to near four hundred men, women, and children, thrown out employ. It may not be amiss to add, that about two mouths ago, the workmen at the factory received notice that their wages would all be lowered, which, caused, what is called, a general turn-out.— Some of them however soon relented this, and went in again at the reduced prices, whilst others were not permuted that privilege. These proceedings had engendered considerable discontent, and it is not improbable, but they may have had some influence with the perpetrators of the deed in question. Certain it is that until this circumstance very few manufactories, of equal extent, were carried on, in this part of the kingdom, where the masters men more cordially accorded than they did at this. The Magistrates of the division have almost incessantly been since occupied in investigating the affair, and endeavouring to bring to justice the authors of it. The town crier even went round with his bell on Sunday warning the inn-keepers against keeping their houses open, later than nine o'clock in the evening. Six men, having at different intervals, been taken up, on suspicion, one of who has since been set at liberty; three remain in custody at Loughborough, & the other two were yesterday at noon sent under an escort from that town to Leicester. Some implements supposed to have been used in destroying the machines, have been seized, and are likewise in the possession of the constables employed by the Magistrates in this business. The Magistrates and police-officers in Nottingham, have also been very active, and many houses in this town have been searched on the occasion. A reward of five hundred guineas is offered in the Londo Gazette, for such information as will lead to the conviction of the perpetrators.— *Nottingham Review*

The two men brought to the County Gaol on Thursday, on suspicion of being concerned in the transaction, are named— Benjamin Badder and John Slater. Another man, charged with the same offence, was also committed yesterday.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000205/18160712/011/0003
Leicester Journal - Friday 12 July 1816

In the commitments to the County Gaol during last week, were two men Benjamin Badder and John Slater, both of Nottingham, on suspicion of being concerned in the late attack upon Mr Heathcote's manufactory at Loughborough.—Jas Towle, of Basford, near Nottingham, has also been committed to the said Gaol, charged with being concerned in the said offence. Luddism has very justly been attributed to the influence of those democratic and disorganising principles which have very extensively prevailed among many of the higher classes in the countries where the stocking and lace manufactory is carried on. The charge we believe to be too well founded. Democratic newspapers, and democratic principles, have had there a very wide circulation, and many tradesman and manufacturers, instead of counteracting them, have lent their aid to give them authority. It ts true they did not expect to have their frames broken, their property destroyed, and their servants murdered. They indulged their own political theories, and wished to realize their own schemes of reform and revolution on those above them. But they have had experience, in the Luddite system, of their own principle carried into effect against themselves; and if the innocent had not, in many instances, like the present, suffered with the guilty, and that demoralising principles were in the lower classes, we should not be sorry for their claims and sufferings. These are the genuine effects of the interest the lower classes in many manufacturing places have been taught by their superiors to take, first, in the French revolution, and then in the character and exploits of Bonaparte.

TO DO

Ov morning 36 Colliers passed through this Town, dragging an campty waggou, and professing to be on their way home into Statfordshire; three of them waited upon she Magistrates, requesting and stated, that they had been as far as with a load of coats, where they had sold them, and had been prevailed on by some Gentleman of that place, to return, after having collected ot 75, to defiay their expences. —The Magisirates told them they were truly sorry for their distressed bet that the means they were pursning, to relief, by going about the country, in bodies, and begging, were highly improper, and could not be tolerated; that they iu in a state of vagravey, and could only be relieved in that character; they were also that while the Magistrates felt it a duty, which most performed, to attend to the just claims of the very inhabitants of their own Town, who are now out of employ, it Was equally their duty to repress the pro ceedings of those men who had an equal tight to from their own parishes; they were desired Proceed through the Town, without bege\vg, and cautioned against the consequences of dis this order. obe ying however, to the men, to ray, (hat they conducted themselves with the Most peaceable and demeanor. TI 1¢ following eéaan extract from a paper which has lately been laid before high legal Authorities, and their opinion is -— The declared intention of the men, who had advanced to St. Albans and was to petition the Prince Kegent on «cconnt of thei: total want of employment at home (« deley, wear Bradley, in the Overseers and the M agistrnies having also declared to them, that the parishes were *0 Over baithened, by families ont of employ, tat the rates were not sufficient to reiieve them. Whatever alleviation of the t of these per- sons—thisinay be, home that maken. necessary forthem to hey. and rheir . 80 begying, «nh them + ® the Vagrant Laws, and makes them liable to be imprisoned and passed home, Moreover this mode of travelling ae in such numbers, yoked tua heavy-load Wargron, draws tovether a vast com curse of andexcites a disposition to tumult, whe to the public peace, and renders the persons, who are the primary occasion of it, to be committed to for want of pureties, for their.good «betis- viour,and possitely $0 by indictment. With respect to their avower 1 intention to peti- fion the Prince Regent, by the 13th' Charles If. ch. y it is thas © ah 4! somes io iis Majesty 4 pretence of a petition, or other addres, accompanied by above the sumber of ten, the punishment is a fine of and three months imprisonment. The third { | of this Act recognizes the right of the sul; J ect to petition the King, or Parliament, but still limits the number to ten persons It has been thought extraordinary that the execution of the five persons who were convicted under a Speclal Commission, at Ely, for rioting, has not hae (be wseal publicity through the streets of every town and in the kingdom. [tix ancasential, that the last dying words of those unfurtunate should be pew rally Their untimely fate should sink deep into the mind of every individual in the and deserves the most serious consideration of any who may be pursing a career si- that which brought them to su uneud. to overturn the laws, and to sack and pillage the property of the peaceable Vo this they were not incited by want Or distress; by ttre miseluet and love of plunder. The attempt failed—as all attempts to trample ander foot the laws should fail; and they have since paid the penalty of cir lives to the violated laws of their country. Their fate affords not only another instance of the inefficiency of popular commotions; it also affords example of the caves which pre-dispose for the perpetration of crime,


---

Debate on technology ; in praise of tax taxing taxation of machinery

TO DO

https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2012/05/23rd-may-1812-vindex-expresses-sympathy.html
23rd May 1812: 'Vindex' expresses sympathy for the plight of the Luddites in the Leeds Mercury

https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2016/11/16th-october-1816-investigator-writes.html
16th October 1816: 'Investigator' writes to the Leeds Mercury in defence of Machinery

https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2016/11/23rd-november-1816-manufacturer-replies.html
23rd November 1816: 'A Manufacturer' replies to 'Observator' in the argument about technology in the Leeds Mercury


https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2016/11/9th-november-1816-observator-writes-to.html
9th November 1816: 'Observator' writes to the Leeds Mercury advocating the taxation of machinery



---



---

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000364/18160824/025/0002
Carlisle Patriot - Saturday 24 August 1816

We regret to observe that the pernicious spirit of Luddism still exists in Leicester, Nottingham, Lincoln, and other manufacturing counties. At the late Nottingham Assizes several desperate characters of this gang were tried, but acquitted. During the trials, says the Lincoln Paper of the 16th instant, Mr. Justice Graham, who tried the prisoners, had the most scandalous language addressed to him in going to, and returning from Court, and many members of the Court were also grossly insulted. There is no member of the Bench more distinguished for mildness, urbanity, and genuine humanity, than Mr. Justice Graham; and it must fill every person with indignation who hears of this infamous conduct.

We understand that a fine of £500 has been set on the county, for the injurious example it has afforded in the excesses by which it has been distinguished. This outrageous behavior will have its effect; it will unite all respectable and peaceable persons in the determination of resisting and putting down such dangerous insolence. At Leicester Assizes, which succeeded those of Nottingham, a large portion of the most respectable inhabitants of Leicester rallied round the constituted authorities, and gave their aid towards the faithful execution of justice. Between two and three hundred assembled at the Exchange; each received a white wand and a club, and headed by the chief Magistrate, they proceeded in fours to the Judges' lodgings, where they formed on each side of the street; after the Judges had entered their carriage, they escorted them to the Castle, and the trials of the Luddites were immediately proceeded in. One desperado named Towle was convicted, and sentenced to suffer death. During the whole day, notwithstanding there was a large assemblage from Nottingham and its environs, the greatest order and decorum was preserved—thus showing to our neighbours, says the Leicester Journal, that when THE BODY IS SOUND AT HEART, turbulence, anarchy, and disorder will never prevail. If the due administration of justice is to be wantonly and seditiously interrupted by threats and violence, then indeed there is an end of everything that is sacred to the Constitution. Nottingham, and all other places, may from hence take a salutary lesson.


---

## Riots, December 1816


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002634/18161202/020/0008
London Chronicle - Monday 02 December 1816

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18161203/006/0003
Morning Chronicle - Tuesday 03 December 1816

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000174/18161205/009/0003
Morning Post - Thursday 05 December 1816



### Leicester

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000196/18161230/012/0002
Aris's Birmingham Gazette - Monday 30 December 1816

It is with the greatest concern we feel it our duty, this week, to record one of the most atrocious attempts at murder that has ever disgraced this county:—On Sunday evening last, about a quarter before eight o'clock, as George Kerry and his family (who reside at a lone house, by the road leading from Bobbers mill to Bilborough) were sitting by the fire, at supper, their house was entered by two men in disguise. Kerry, in attempting to seize the foremost man, was shot at by him, but without effect; during the struggle the other man fired, but fortunately the slugs only grazed his head. The murderers thinking their object attained, instantly departed. The most prompt assistance was rendered by the neighbours, and the police from Nottingham; but owing to the frost and the extreme darkness of the night, no trace whatever could be discovered of their retreat. On further enquiry, we learn, that a third person was standing at the door during the transaction, and the prevailing opinion is, that the party were *Luddites*, and that they came from New Radford. *Nottingham Journal*

