# The Execution of James Towle




https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001100/18160816/007/0001
Nottingham Review - Friday 16 August 1816

Leicester

Trial of Towle, Slater and Badder.

Saturday, August 10, 1816

TO DO

copy here: https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2016/08/10th-august-1816-trial-of-james-towle.html





----
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001255/18160813/015/0003
Public Ledger and Daily Advertiser - Tuesday 13 August 1816

TRIAL OF THE LUDDITES AT LEICESTER. Leicester, Aug. 10. —The trial of Towle, SLater, and Badder, charged with feloniously entering the lace manufactory of Messrs. Heathcote and Boden at Loughborough, on the night of the 28th June, came on this morning, at seven o'clock, before the Hon. Baron Graham, when, after upwards of fifty witnesses had been examined for and against the prisoners (which occupied the Court more than fourteen hours), the Jury found Towle Guilty; and Slater and Badder— Not Guilty.

Several witnesses swore that Towle was at work at four o'clock on the Saturday morning, and one also swore he saw him in his (Towle's) house at about 12 the night before, thereby making it appear rather improbable that he should have been at Loughborough on the night in question; but a Nottingham Police Officer, having positively sworn that Towle informed him, a few days before the outrage in question took place, that there would a *job* on Friday night, if not put off;" and also, that he met Towle on the Saturday morning, at six o'clock, at Beeston, near Nottingham; and that in reply to a question put by the Officer, he admitted that he was very unwell and fatigued, which appeared to he the case—this, coupled with the circumstance of his having told the same Officer, when coming down to Red-hill, (the place where criminals were formerly executed), on his road to gael, that he would have to ride *back to that spot*, and desiring the Officer to inform his wife to beg his body, and let it be placed alongside Bamford, who, it will be recollected, was shot in the act of frame-breaking; and several other equally suspicions circumstances, tended to overrule the *alibi* attempted to be set up, and thus to fix guilt upon a man whose firmness on receiving the awful sentence, after standing 14 hours heavily ironed, deserved a better fate.

Never in the memory of the oldest inhabitant did a trial excite such a degree of interest, mixed with apprehension for the public peace, as this. Upwards of 800 persons, among whom were some of the most respectable tradesmen of the town, armed with the oid-fasnioned weapon of defence, viz. the constable's stave, with the Mayor at their head, were called out by our worthy High Sheriff, C. W. Pochin, Esq. of Berkby, whose purely constitutional notions of preserving the public peace are not unworthy of imitation, in a day when military display is so prevailing.

ANOTHER ACCOUNT. Leicester, Aug;. 11. —The following brief account of the important trial of the Luddites, continued in our County Gaol, for destroying Heathcote and Boden's machinery, commenced yesterday morning at seven o'clock, and lasted until ten in the evening. Judge Graham was three hours in summing up the evidence; and the Jury, after a short deliberation, returned a verdict of Guilty against Towle, who is supposed to be one of the chiefs of this desperate association. The two other prisoners, Slater and Badder, were acquitted. Seventy of their partizans from Loughborough and Nottingham came to prove an *alibi*, but the evidence for the prosecution was so strong against Towle, that all they had to say had no weight with the Jury. Serjeant Vaughan was leading Counsel for the prosecution, and Mr. Denman for the prisoners. Serjeant Vaughan's address to the Jury was one of the most able ever delivered in a Court of Justice. It was feared a serious disturbance would take place if the prisoners were found guilty, but the precautions taken were so good as to set at defiance the machinations of the disaffected. About 500 constables were sworn in to preserve the peace; and the Gentlemen of the town, with our worthy Chief Magistrate at their head, armed with clubs, escorted the Judge to and from the Castle. There were also two or three troops of the 15th Hussars in the villages a mile two from the town, read aty a minute's notice, if an attempt had been made to rescue the prisoners on their return from the Castle, which was fully expected, according to the information the Mayor had received, and which was very probable, considering the late hour at whichd the prisoners were brought hack to gaol.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000205/18160816/012/0003
Leicester Journal - Friday 16 August 1816

Also appears as: Stamford Mercury - Friday 23 August 1816

Saturday morning presented a most interesting and grateful spectacle; the violent and disgraceful proceedings which are stated to have occurred during the late Assizes at Nottingham, and which were said to have intimidated the Jury, from a conscientious discharge of their duty, induced a large portion of the most respectable inhabitants of this town, to rally round the Constituted Authorities, and give their aid towards the administration of Justice. At 6 o'clock between two and three hundred assembled at the Exchange, each receiving a white wand and a club, and headed by the Chief Magistrate, proceeded in fours to the Judges lodgings, where they formed on each side of the street, after the Judges had entered their Carriage, they escorted them to the Castle, and the trials of the Luddites were immediately proceeded in. It was soon after 7 o'clock when the prisoners (Towle, Slater, and Badder,) were put to the Bar, and the business continued without any interruption whatever, until half past nine in the evening. After having passed the different sentences upon the prisoners, the Judges were reconducted to their lodgings, in the same manner in which they came. The Chief Magistrate and his party then returned to the Castle, and escorted the Prisoners to Gaol, where having safely deposited them, the assemblage broke up. During the whole of the day, (notwithstanding there was a large assemblage from Nottingham and its environs) the greatest order and decorum were preserved— thus proudly showing to our neighbours, that when *the body is sound at heart*, turbuleuce, anarchy, and disorder will never prevail. If the due administration of Justice is to be wantonly interrupted by threats and lawless violence, then indeed is there an end of every thing that is sacred in the Constitution! Nottingham may from hence take a salutary lesson, and by a total change of manners and *principles*, again class among the most loyal and best of his Majesty's subjects.

The learned Judge, (Mr. Baron Graham,) was two hours and a quarter in summing up the evidence, taking a clear, distinct, and comprehensive view of the whole particularly as it affected Towle, when after a consultation of a few minutes only, the Jury returned a verdict of guilty against him, and acquitted Slater, (the prosecution against Badder, the other Prisoner, having been previously withdrawn,) the Judge immediately afterwards passed sentence of death upon Towle, who had a determined aspect throughout, and received the awful sentence without any apparent emotion whatever.

Seventy one witnesses in favour of the Prisoners were brought to prove Alibi's.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000237/18160816/039/0003
Stamford Mercury - Friday 16 August 1816

LEICESTER Assizes.—These assizes closed on Tuesday. *James Towle*, charged with breaking into the manufactory of Messrs. Heathcote and Boden, at Loughboro', on Friday night the 28th of June, and, with other persons, breaking upwards of 50 lace-frames, was found *guilty*, sentenced to *death*, and left for execution. *John Slater* and *Benj. Badder*, charged with the same offence, were acquitted.—(More than 50 witnesses were examined on these trials, which occupied the Cour» for fourteen hours. Several witnesses swore that Towle was at work at four o'clock on the Saturday morning, and one also swore that he saw him in his (Towle's) house about 12 the night before, thereby making it appear rather improbable that he should have been at Loughborough on the night in question; but a Nottingham Police Officer, having positively sworn that Towle informed him, a few days before the outrage in question took place, that "there would be *job* on Friday night, if not put off;" and also, that he met Towle on the Saturday morning, at six o'clock, at Beeston, near Nottingham; and that in reply to a question put by the Officer, he admitted that he was very unwell and fatigued, which appeared to the case—this, coupled with the circumstance of his having told the same Officer, when coming down Red-hill, (the place where criminals were formerly executed,) on his road to gaol, that he would have to *ride back to that spot*, and desiring the Officer to inform his wife to beg his body, and let it be placed alongside Bamford, who, it will be recollected, was shot in the act of frame-breaking; and several other equally suspicious circumstances, tended to overrule the *alibi* attempted be set up. The firmness of Towle on receiving the awful sentence, after standing 14 hours heavily ironed, was extraordinary, and worthy of a man less infamous.)





https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2016/11/22nd-november-1816-nottingham-review.html


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0001100/18161122/030/0003?browse=true
Nottingham Review - Friday 22 November 1816

?? From luddite bicenteneary... CHECK

Execution of James Towle.

This unfortunate man, who, on Wednesday last, in the vigour of manhood, and prime of his days, paid the forfeit of his life to the offended laws of this country, was born at Old Basford, in this county, of honest and creditable parents; one of whom, the father, was, about two years ago, seized by the icy hand of death, and has therefore, happily been prevented from feeling the painful emotions which must agitate the parental breast, and tear every feeling of a father's heart, in the contemplation of the disgraceful end of a darling son; but the widowed bereaved mother, is left to struggle with all the anguish which such a catastrophe is capable of inspiring. HER feelings we will not attempt to describe; the death of a son, is painful under any circumstances; but in the present instance, after all the hopes that might have been excited by the long delay which has taken place since the awful sentence of the law was passed, the thorns, which tear her heart, must be beyond desscription terrible: the barbed arrow of sorrow has entered, which probably will never be extracted while wife remains.

Towle was apprenticed to his father, as a framework-knitter; and no particular circumstance marked his character until he arrived at manhood; but since that period, HIS LIFE has several times been in jeopardy, in consequence of his bad conduct, and immoral life. In the year 1814, he was accused of being one of the band of framebreakers that destroyed some frames in Mr Garton's house, in New Basford, the village in which Towle then lived, and at the Lent Assizes following, he was put the bar, in the County-hall, in this town, and tried for the offence; but after a long consultation, the Jury brought in a verdict of NOT GUILTY. In July, 1816, he was, however, again committed to prison on the charge for which he has now paid the penalty of the law. The offence having been perpetrated at Loughborough, he was of course confined in Leicester gaol, and on Saturday morning, August 10, about seven o'clock, he, along with John Slater Benjamin Badder, was put to the bar. The trial lasted upwards of twelve hours, and after Baron Graham, who presided, had given his charge, the Jury found Towle GUILTY OF AIDING AND ABETTING, BUT NOT OF FIRING THE PISTOL AT ASHER; and in consequence of the verdict, Baron Graham passed sentence of death upon him.

In the course of the trial, Mr. Denman, one of the counsel for the prisoners, made some objections to the wording of the indictment; and the prisoner was resspited, in order that the opinion of the twelve Judges might be taken on the subject. On the 13th of November, the case was argued in the Court of Exchequer, and the following reports of it is given in the London papers:—

"The twelve Judges sat in the Exchequer Chamber to hear arguments on the reserved case of James Towle, one of the men convicted before Mr. Baron Graham, at Leicester. The Prisoner was one of those persons connected with the frame-breakers, and was charged with several others, with shooting at certain of his Majesty's subjects with intent to kill them. The two points reserved were, first, that the Jury having found the Prisoner guilty of being present, but not of firing the pistol he could not be found guilty as a principle; and further, that on account of the word ‘feloniously’ being omitted in the accounts, charging him with being an aider and abettor, neither could be found guilty upon those counts.

"Mr Denman was heard at considerable length in support of the objections taken at the trial, and submitted, that the Prosecutors Counsel, by having put the question to the Jury, whether the prisoner was the person who fired the gun or not, and having drawn from them an opinion, must not now complain, if that opinion should prove fatal to the prosecution.

"Mr Reynolds, on the other side, argued in support the verdict Guilty; and contended, that the word ‘feloniously’ being mentioned in the first count, must be taken to be so connected with the words ‘then and there present aiding and assisting’ in the other counts, so as to over-rule them all. The Learned Counsel also contended, that this case came precisely under the provisions of the Black Act, and therefore, that all those aiding and abetting must be considered as principals. With respect to the question put to the Jury, and their finding upon it, the question itself was unnecessary, and the answer to it ought, in no way, to affect the verdict in any legal point of view."

The Judges being unanimous in their opinion, that the objections could not be sustained, the law was ordered to take its course. The unhappy man heard the result of the application with the utmost fortitude and composure; and constantly, whenever opportunity served, declared his innocence.—He several times expressed his thankfulness to Mr. Musson, the keeper, for the kind treatment he had received from him, which was all along distinguished by Mr. M’s characteristic humanity.

On Tuesday, the Rev. Mr. Highton, the chaplain to the County Gaol, preached what is termed the condemned sermon; and on the same morning, Towle took a very affecting farewell of his wife and four young children.

On Wednesday morning, he was taken, under an escort, in a chaise, to the building, an appendage to the New Bridewell now erecting, within a few yards of the west-end of the infirmary. At an early hour, great numbers assembled to see the new drop (which had been placed there only the day before) and kept increasing until twelve o'clock, when Towle, with a firm and undaunted step, came upon the platform, attended by the Sheriff and his deputy, the chaplain, the two gaolers, &c. after paying the utmost possible attention to the prayers of the chaplain, with a firm and audible voice, he gave out one of Dr. Watt's admirable hymns, beginning with—

"Oh! for an overcoming faith,
To cheer my dying hours;
To triumph o’er the monster death,
With all his frightful powers."

He gave out the whole of the hymn, two lines at a time, and joined in singing it with the utmost fervency. About half past twelve, every thing being ready the platform fell, and launched him into eternity, in the presence of an immense number of spectators, who conducted themselves in the most orderly manner, and without the least attempt a disturbance.

After hanging the usual time, his body was demanded by his cousin Josiah Towle, who before he could obtain it, was required to put his hand to the following document:—

"The corpse of James Towle having been delivered to me on behalf of his mother, who is desirous of interring it at Basford, I hereby undertake that the same shall be buried there before sunset to-morrow, with all possible privacy, and I hereby make myself responsible that there shall be no public exhibition, either previously to, or at the funeral, and particularly that the corpse shall not be detained in the town of Nottingham, but that the same shall be conveyed, as privately as possible, throughout that town, and in case of any disturbance taking place, in consequence of the conveyance or burial of the said corpse, I consent this paper may be produced in evidence against me.

“Dated this 20th of Nov. 1816.

            HIS
“JOSIAH + TOWLE”
          MARK

"I further engage that the corpse shall not be halted or detained at any other place between Leicester and Basford, than the following:—

“To bail for one hour at Rothley House.
“To put up for the night or bail at Costock.
“To bail for one hour at Bradmore and from thence to Basford without stopping."

The body was conveyed through Nottingham during the course of Wednesday night, and on Thursday afternoon, was committed to the earth in Basford church yard, by the side of his father, in the presence of thousands of spectators; every thing being conducted in the most peaceable and orderly manner.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18161130/019/0004

Leeds Mercury - Saturday 30 November 1816

EXECUTION OF J. TOWLE THE LUDDITE

Towle was apprentice to his father, a frame-work-knitter; and no particular circumstance marked his character, good or bad, until he arrived at manhood; but since that period, his life has several times been in jeopardy. In the year 1814 he was accused of being one of the band of frame-breakers that destroyed some frames in Mr. Garton's house, in New Basford, the village in which Towle then lived; and at the Lent Assizes following, he was put to the bar, in the County-Hall, in Nottingham, and tried for the offence; but after a long consultation, the Jury brought in a verdict of not guilty. In July, 1816, he was, however, again committed to prison on the charge for which he has now paid the penalty of the law. The offence having been perpetrated at Loughborough, he was of course confined in Leicester gaol, and on Saturday morning, August 10, about seven o'clock, he, along with John Slater and Benjamin Badder, was put to the bar. The trial lasted upwards of twelve hours, and after Baron Graham, who presided, had given his charge, the Jury found Towle *Guilty of aiding and abetting, but not of firing the pistol at Asher*. And, in consequence of the verdict, Baron Graham passed sentence of death upon him.

In the course of the trial, Mr. Denman, one of the counsel for the prisoners, made some objections to the wording of the indictment; and the prisoner was respited, in order that the opinion of the twelve Judges might be taken on the subject.

On the 13th November the case was argued. The Judges being unanimous in their opinion, that the objections could not be sustained, the law was ordered to take its course.
  
On the morning of Wednesday se'nnight, he was taken, under an escort, in a chaise, to the building, an appendage to the New Bridewell now erecting, a short distance from the west end of the Infirmary. At an early hour, great numbers assembled to see the new drop (which had been placed there only the day before) and kept increasing until twelve o'clock, when Towle, with a firm and undaunted step, came upon the platform, attended by the Sheriff and his deputy, the chaplain, the two gaolers, &c. after paying the utmost possible attention to the prayers of the chaplain, with a firm and audible voice, he gave out one of Dr. Watts's admirable hymns, beginning with

> "Oh! for an overcoming faith,  
> To cheer my dying hours;
> To triumph o'er the monster death,  
> With all his frightful powers."

He gave out the whole of this hymn, two lines at a time, and joined in singing it with the utmost fervency. About half past twelve, every thing being ready, the platform fell, and launched him into eternity, in the presence of an immense number of spectators, who conducted themselves in the most orderly manner, and without the least attempt at disturbance.

After hanging the usual time, his body was demanded by his cousin Josiah Towle, who, before he could obtain it, was required to put his hand to the following document:—

"The corpse of James Towle having been delivered to me on behalf of his mother, who is desirous of interring it at Basford, I hereby undertake that the same shall be buried there before sunset tomorrow, with all possible privacy, and I hereby make myself responsible that there shall be no public exhibition, either previously to, or at the funeral, and particularly that the corpse shall not be detained at the town of Nottingham, but that the same shall be conveyed, as privately as possible, through that town, and in case of any disturbance taking place, in consequence of the conveyance or burial of the said corpse, I consent that this paper may be produced in evidence against me." JOSIAH TOWLE X his Mark.

"Dated this 20th of Nov. 1816."

"I further engage that the corpse shall not be halted or detained at any other place, between Leicester and Basford, than the following:-

"To bait one hour at Rothley-House'.

"To put up for the night or bait at Costock.
  
"To bait for one hour at Bradmore, and from thence to Basford without stopping."
  
The body was conveyed through Nottingham during the course of Wednesday night, and on Thursday afternoon, was committed to the earth in Basford church-yard, by the side of his father, in the presence of thousands of spectators ;-every thing being conducted in the most peaceable and orderly manner.

James Towle was about five feet two inches high, 34 years of age, and has left a wife and four children to lament his untimely end. During the whole of his confinement, he conducted himself with great propriety, but elicited nothing that would at all implicate the *Luddites*, in whose dark and diabolical system he has been the first to suffer. His wife and four children, with some relatives, arrived on Sunday, and continued until Tuesday. The following letter, addressed to his wife, written after her departure, and late on the night previous to his execution, will best exemplify the tranquil state his mind was brought to from an attention to religious exercises since his condemnation:—

"Dear Wife— In a few more hours I shall be no more. But my dear creature, in my last moments it is my duty to beg of you to seek for that peace in God which is far beyond my pen to describe or tongue to speak; and my dear girl, above all, I hope you will bring my dear children up in the fear and love of God, and then you will find a friend-a friend that will support you through all the troubles of this world, and in the hour of death give you that comfort that will raise your mind far above all the treasures that the earth can afford. My dear girl, this afternoon there has been a gentleman that wished to see me, and promised me that he would do a something for you towards making you comfortable, and my dear, I have no doubt but my mother will be agreeable for you and my dear children to be with her, and I hope and trust she will be a mother and is guardian to my sweet babes, which in so short a time will be fatherless. Dear wife, my last words are, may God Almighty bless and protect you and my dear children in this world, and prepare you for the world to come, is my sincere prayer.

"From your dying husband

"James Towle.

"Tuesday night, ten o'clock"


[TH: but it seems Towle did confess, as per Nottingham Review - Friday 24 January 1817 in april_1817.md https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2016/11/20th-november-1816-james-towle-makes.html HO 40/9/4. Towle confession ]
 