# Attack on Prince Regent

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18170201/006/0002
Leeds Mercury - Saturday 01 February 1817

ATTACK ON THE PRINCE REGENT. An immense body of people had assembled in St. James's Park, at Whitehall, and in Parliament street, to see the procession of his Royal Highness the Prince Regent to and from the House. The multitude was vociferous-and the most outrageous epithets were applied to his Royal Highness as he passed along in the State Carriage, guarded on both sides by a strong escort of guards and constables. On the return of his Royal Highness from the Lords' Chamber of Parliament the crowding, clamour, and insults, increased. At the same time that cries of "God save the King," and huzzas were mixed with the vociferations personally offensive to the Prince Regent. After the cavalcade had entered the park, at the Horse Guards - and that it had proceeded about half way down the Mall, one of the windows of the state carriage in which his Royal-Highness was placed, along with Lord James Murray, was shattered in two places by stones or some missiles from a hand unseen. It was nearly opposite the park wall of Carlton-house. From the small puncture of the points from which the cracks in the pane radiated, it was at first thought to have happened by the accidental contact of an officer's sword, riding alongside, and who might have been pressed by the crowd against the Carriage, or that fragments of gravel had been thrown up against the glass by the horses' hoofs, or by some ruffian intentionally — but these ideas were discountenanced: an alarm was therefore excited that it might have proceeded from an air gun. No bullets nor stones were found in the carriage, the opposite window was not broken, nor was any person taken into custody; and his Royal Highness was safely set down at St. James's Palace, from which he had set out.

The Prince Regent, on alighting from the state carriage at St. James's, informed Sir Nathaniel Conant, who was in attendance, of the circumstance, and immediately afterwards the Duke of Montrose went off with all possible speed for Viscount Sidmouth, for his assistance and those under him, to endeavour to discover the offenders. His Grace proceeded to the Secretary of State's Office. when Lord Sidmouth not being there, Mr. Hiley Addington sent a messenger to his brother at the House of Peers, to inform him of what had happened, and to command his attendance at St. James's Palace. The Prince Regent, after waiting a considerable time for the arrival of Lord Sidmouth at St. James's Palace, left it in his private carriage for Carlton House, leaving his commands for Lord Sidmouth to follow him. His Lordship arrived shortly afterwards, as did the Duke of York, and the Duke and Duchess of Gloucester.

A drawing of the pane of glass, describing two small punctures from which cracks radiated, was made by his Royal Highness himself after he arrived at St. James's, but after this, we understand the pane was broken or fell into pieces, and that by a second stroke. Whatever substance it was by which the glass was broken, it did not enter the carriage, as it was carefully searched for the purpose.

As a proof to what extent the terror excited by this traitorous assault was carried in the minds of Ministers, the Guards at the Palaces, the Park. the Bank, and every where, were doubled. A message was sent to the Lord Mayor, informing him of the outrage, and instructing him, if he found it necessary towards the maintenance of the public peace, to call in the military power, to address himself to the Commanding Officer at the Tower for that purpose; and dispatches were sent by the mail coaches to every part of the kingdoms, to put the Magistrates in every place on their guard.

We are happy to state, however, that by five o'clock in the afternoon the streets were perfectly clear of the mob, and no disposition to riot appeared in any part of the town. *Morning Chronicle*

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18170208/004/0002
Leeds Mercury - Saturday 08 February 1817

ATTACK ON THE PRINCE REGENT.

On Saturday, *Thomas Scott*, the person in custody, who stands charged with being a party to the outrage committed upon the Prince Regent, on Tuesday week, underwent another examination at Bow-Street. The office was crowded. Mr. Adolphus attended as Counsel for the prisoner.

The first witness called, was Lord James Murray, who again minutely detailed all that came under his observation on that occasion. His Lordship stated, in the course of his evidence, that he observed ten or twelve persons singularly conspicuous in their violence, and whom he could identify. When the carriage reached about the centre of the Mall, one of the windows, on the left side, was perforated by something striking against it. The noise was so great from the blow as almost to stun him. On looking to the glass, be observed two small round holes very near to each other; the glass was starred, but not further broken; the small splinters of the glass flew downwards, towards the opposite side of the carriage. His Lordship had not the least doubt those holes were produced by bullets, such as he tad seen discharged from stick-guns, which are not quite so large as an air-gun, and from the direction they took they must have come from above. The glass was extremely thick, and even the large stones which afterwards broke the glass did not enter the carriage. The perforations on the glass were very small, not larger than a pea, and quite round. He was quite satisfied the holes were made by a metallic body, from the appearance they assumed. There were other fractures by stones, one of which demolished the holes he had been describing. By the Prince Regent's desire his Lordship put his hat against the window, to prevent any stones from coming in, and fortunately it was he did so for many stones were thrown, and hit the glass afterwards, seven or eight in number. His lordship had since been in the Park, and on looking among the trees, he observed in several of them a considerable quantity of stones remaining, as if they had been put there purposely. His Royal Highness sat with his face to the horses; the Duke of Montrose and witness sat opposite his Royal Highness, with their backs to the horses.

James Neverhouse, of Newington Causeway, was in the Park on Tuesday; saw the prisoner pressing forward of himself, as if he wished to be foremost of the mob; saw a stone thrown from where the prisoner stood, but cannot say he threw it; the stone went in a slanting direction, and certainly hit the carriage.

A person of the name of Chaunter, now came forward to offer evidence to rebut that given against the prisoner; but his testimony was rejected, on the ground that he could be examined alone on the trial of the prisoner, should it be deemed proper to commit him. Mr. Hicks recognized this witness too, as having been before him upon a charge of misconduct, within the last three months, at Marlborough-Street.

The prisoner, in the course of his examination, repeatedly declared his innocence, and his willingness to stand the test of every inquiry.

Information, it is said, has been received by Mr. Hicks, tending in a great measure to confirm the belief that it was intended to attempt the Regent's life, but this, in no respects, affects or applies to the prisoner.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001476/18170201/006/0002
London Courier and Evening Gazette - Saturday 01 February 1817

SECOND EDITION.

At half-past twelve o'clock this morning the examination of *Thomas Scott*, charged with being one of the persons who committed the atrocious outrages against the of person of his Royal Highness the Prince Regent Tuesday last, was resumed before Mr. Hicks and Mr Gifford, the Magistrates.

Lord James Murray stated, that on Tuesday last he accompanied his Royal Highness the Prince Regent to the House of Lords. On the approach of the Royal carriage into the Park, from St. James's'Palace, the mob commenced hooting, hissing, &c. &c. A number of persons surrounded the carriage, and continued near it until the arrival of the procession to the Horse Guards, when they dispersed thro' the avenues towards George-street; and in Parliament-street they met the carriage again, when they re-commenced hissing, hooting, &c. until its arrival at the House of Lords. On the return of his Royal Highness through the Horse Guards, the mob again assembled from George-street, and repeated the hooting, groans, &c.: they came up to the carriage on the near side; they were the same faces his Lordship saw about the carriage as the procession was proceeding to the House: they did not keep close to the carriage. The mob continued to surround the carriage until it arrived between Marlborough House and the Stable Yard, when the near window was perforated by something which his Lordship conceived to be bullets, about the same size of a pea; immediately after that, a large stone was thrown against the glass window, and it smashed it,—some of the particles of glass fell into his Lordship's eyes, and his Royal Highness directed him put his hat against the window; the mob continued to throw stores at the carriage until it got to the Stable-yard; his Lordship could not identify the person of the prisoner.

Mr. James Moorhouse, of No. 39, Newington Causeway, stated, that on Tuesday last he accompanied a friend to the Park, to see the procession. On the approach of the Royal carriage to the elevation near Carlton-house, the mob, which was immense, began to vociferate hisses, groans, &c. &c. Witness continued near the same spot until the procession returned from the Lords, and then preceded it towards the Stable-yard. On the arrival of the Royal carriage opposite Marlborough-house, a crowd of persons gathered round it on the near side; witness was rather before the carriage, and he saw the prisoner's face once or twice; he appeared to be pressing forward towards the carriage, and was very active in the mob; he did not appear as if he was pushed by them. Witness saw a stone thrown against the carriage, but he, could not say that the prisoner threw it; it came from place where the prisoner was standing. He saw an arm up after the stone was thrown, but could not say that the arm was the prisoner's. He was sure of the prisoner's person, as he had often seen him about town.

Mr. Hicks observed, at the close of the evidence, that it wore the aspect of three distinct species of treason. It was certain that the offence of high treason was committed on that day, and the question was, by whom was it committed? His (Mr. H.'s) mind was made up, that there was full and sufficient evidence already heard against the prisoner to warrant him to commit him for trial.

He was then remanded for re-examination on Wednesday next, at one o'clock.

ATTACK ON THE REGENT.

The Public may wish to know how the Country papers speak of this treasonable attempt. We made extracts from those received yesterday—We continue them to day:—

"Such has been the remit of the machinations of those incendiaries, whose only objects are riot, robbery and revolution. We hope and trust that means will be taken to prevent the further anti-constitutional endeavours of the vile Cabal." *Chester Chronicle.*

The following is from *Drakards Stamford News* of yesterday— Attempts at assassination are considered as subjects for levity !!

"Our readers we know to be particularly anxious for the fate of —— ———— of St. James's; but as yet we cannot inform them whether his Royal Highness was shot from the trees or the stars; and, if shot at *at all* whether the Lord of the Bedchamber swallowed the bullets. It is said that the plot of Spa-fields, having failed in effect, it has been thought expedient by the Ministers prepare new one ;--but this is not credible."

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18170203/006/0003
Morning Chronicle - Monday 03 February 1817

SECOND EXAMINATION OF THOMAS SCOTT, ON SUSPICION OF HIGH TREASON.

BOW-STREET, SATURDAY— Lord James Murray was the first witness called. He stated, that on Tuesday last he accompanied his Royal Highness the Prince-Regent from St James's Palace to the House of Lords. On coming into the Park, from the Stable-yard, he discovered that's great concourse of spectators had assembled, and they proceeded to surround the carriage, hooting, hissing, &c. The mob was with, and near, the carriage, until it arrived at the Horse Guards ;-some of them then separated, and went towards George-street. They met and assailed the carriage in Whitehall; and near the House of Lords his Lordship saw a great many of the same countenances he had seen in the Park around the carriage. On the return of his Royal Highness, after having passed through the Horse Guards, the mob followed the carriage in the same manner they had done before. When the carriage arrived nearly opposite the end of Marlborough House, the near window was perforated in two places, in roundish holes; there was about the breadth of two fingers between them, and in the intermediate space there was a crack running from one hole to the other.

Mr. Hicks— Did your Lordship hear any thing before you saw the holes?— I heard the glass struck very sharply, and I then saw it was broken. I saw the glass as quick as lightning driven in a slanting position to the other side of the carriage. It struck the glass so sharply as almost to deprive me of my hearing.

Mr. Hicks— Your Lordship sat with your back towards the horses, so that any other person in the carriage might not have heard it so forcibly?—My right ear was very close to the glass.

Mr. Gifford—From all your Lordship saw and heard, what is the impression on your Lordship's mind with respect to what could have caused the perforations?—I think, from what I heard, and from appearances, that they must have been caused by bullets, or by some composition; I am sure they could not have been made by stones, as both the holes were made at the same time.

Mr. Hicks—Whatever it might have been, according to the impression on your Lordship's mind it could not be stones?— No; as the holes were obliquely made, as if the cause of them had come from the trees. The holes were of that size which he had seen made by shot fired out of an air gun, made in the shape of a stick, about the size of a pea. When we got between Marlborough Gardens and the Stable-yard, a large stone was thrown against the window, and so much of the particles of glass got into my eyes that I could scarcely see.

Mr. Gifford—Can your Lordship say whether any stones were thrown after the glass had been perforated?—I think some stones were thrown behind; about ten yards after the carriage had passed Marlborough-gardens, between them and the stable yard, a large stone was thrown which fractured the glass; it was thrown with so much violence as to pulverize the glass; some pieces stuck into his Lordship's forehead, and some of the larger pieces of glass fell in the carriage, and some into the road. Witness put up his hand to his eyes, and immediately afterwards seven or eight stones were thrown, which struck different parts of the carriage; there were no stones of the description of those so thrown in the road. His Lordship had since seen the carriage, and be found it to be deeply in indented. He was astonished to find that the stones recoiled from the glass. Between Marlborough House and the Stable-yard, there were a great many very large stones thrown; they flew thickest when the carriage was turning round into the Stable-yard; some of them were as big as his fist. By the advice of his Royal Highness I put up my hat to the broken glass. I have examined the state-carriage since, and have discovered several dents in the panel near the glass. There were four or five dents near the place where his Royal Highness sat. I went to the Park yesterday for the purpose of ascertaining the precise spot where the carriage was attacked, and I found a great many stones there. I looked into the trees, and was astonished to find that between Marlborough House and the Stable-yard, in every other tree there were a great many very large stones." In answer to some questions put by Mr. Adolphus, Counsel for the prisoner, his Lordship said the Prince sat in the centre of the carriage; there was no person on either side of him.

A person stepped forward who said his name was James Moorhouse, and he lived at No. 39, Newington-causeway. On Tuesday last he went to the Park to see the procession to the House: he stood on the top of the hill near Carlton-house; there was a great deal of hissing and hooting, which witness was very sorry to hear. Witness continued in the Park until the procession returned, and went towards the Stable yard; he got stationed in the crowd, just beyond Marlborough House, on the right side of the middle walk. Witness was rather before the carriage when he saw the prisoner once or twice. Witness was quite sure of his person as he had seen him before about town; he appeared to be pressing forward, and was very active in the mob. Witness saw him a second time near the Life-guardsman (Laycock). Witness saw a stone thrown, but could not say the prisoner threw it; it came from the place where the prisoner was standing; he saw an arm raised up, but he could not say whether it was the prisoner's. Witness saw no more of the prisoner; he got near Lord Harrington s windows, and saw a boy about 15 or 16 years of age throwing stones at the carriage. Witness attempted to seize him, but could not, as the pressure of the crowd was so great The stones struck the royal carriage; he should know the boy again. Witness went to the house of Correction on Thursday, and immediately identified the prisoner.

Robert Turner was next called. The whole amount of his evidence was, that he saw a man throw a stone at the carriage, and it broke the window, but he was sure it was not the prisoner.

Mr. Hicks observed, that in cases, and particularly in a case of so much importance both to the public and the prisoner, he was most anxious that the accused should have the benefit of legal assistance; but (observed the Worthy Magistrate) I will tell you, Mr. Adolphus, that the charge likely to be instituted against the prisoner is of the highest nature; and before I fully commit him for trial, I shall cautiously look into the different Acts of Parliament. But I am so distinctly clear upon all the points of law applicable to the present case, that I think the evidence bears out three different species of high treason against the unfortunate man at the bar; my mind is made up; we have evidence enough to shew that high treason has been committed on that day. Then the only question is, by whom was it committed? This remains for a Jury to decide." All the witnesses then signed and swore to their depositions, and the prisoner was ordered to be brought up again on Wednesday next, at one o'clock, in order to be finally examined. On an application made by Mr. Adolphus, Mr. Hicks gave directions that the prisoner's legal advisers should be admitted to him in prison.

---

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000174/18170203/003/0002
Morning Post - Monday 03 February 1817

THE ATTACK UPON THE REGENT.

THIRD EXAMINATION OF THOMAS SCOTT, ON SUSPICION OF HIGH TREASON.

Bow Street.— It being generally understood that the above-mentioned person was on Saturday to undergo a final examination on a charge of High Treason against his Royal Highness the Prince Regent, a great number of respectable persons thronged to the Office at an early hour, anxious to be present at so important an investigation. The prisoner had been brought up from the House of Correction, and at half past eleven o'clock Lord James Murray arrived at the Office, and signified to the Magistrates, Messrs. Hicks and Gifford, his wish that the examination should be proceeded on. The prisoner was accordingly put to the bar. Lord James Murray was the first witness called. He stated that on Tuesday last he accompanied his Royal Highness the Prince Regent from St. James's Palace to the House of Lords. On coming into the Park, from the Stable-yard, he discovered that a great concourse of spectators had assembled, and they proceeded to surround the carriage, hooting, hissing, &c.

Mr. GIFFORD— "Would your Lordship be able to recognize any of their countenances?"— A. "I think. I could recognize the countenances of five or six." —  His Lordship's evidence being resumed, he stated that the mob was with, and near the carriage, until it arrived at the Horse-guards; some of them then separated, and went towards George-street; he supposed for the purpose of meeting the carriage in Palace-yard. They met and assailed the carriage in Whitehall; and near the House of Lords his Lordship saw a great many of the same countenances he had seen in the Park around the carriage. On the return of his Royal Highness, after having passed through the Horse-guards, the mob followed the carriage in the same manner they had done before.

Mr. GIFFORD— "Did your Lordship observe any of the same faces that were in the Park when his Royal Highness was going to the House?" — Lord Murray — "I was going to say they came from George-street, but instead of coming on both sides of the carriage, they kept to the left; the near side I saw many of the same persons that I saw on going to the House; those whom I saw active on going to the House did not keep close to the carriage, but kept at some distance, opposite the window, behind the life-guards; there were about a dozen, and a great number of them were known to each other, and acting in concert."

Mr. HICKS— "Will your Lordship come to any thing particular that might have occurred."

Lord Murray— "Yes; when the carriage arrived nearly opposite the end of Marlborough House, the near window was perforated in two places, in roundish holes; there was about the breadth of two fingers between them, and in the intermediate space there was a crack running from one hole to the other."

Mr. HICKS— "Did your Lordship hear any thing before you saw the holes?" A. "I heard the glass struck very sharply, and I then saw it was broken. I saw the glass as quick as lightning driven in a slanting position to the other side of the carriage. It struck the glass so sharply, as almost to deprive me of my hearing."

Mr. HICKS— "Your Lordship sat with your back towards the horses, so that any person in the carriage might hot have heard it so forcibly."— A. "My right ear was very close to the glass."

Mr. GIFFORD— "From all your Lordship saw and heard, what is the impression on your Lordship's mind with respect to what could have caused the perforations?"— A. "I think, from what I heard, and from appearances, that they must have been caused by bullets, or by some composition; I am sure they could not have been made by stones, as both the holes were made at the same time."

Mr. HICKS— "Whatever it might have been, according to the impression on your Lordship's mind it could not be stones?"— A. "No, as the holes were obliquely made, as if the cause of them had come from the trees."

Mr. GIFFORD— "Did your Lordship look upwards to the trees?"— A. "No, I did not."

Here the proceedings were interrupted by some person, who announced that some friends belonging to the Prisoner wished to have access to him; upon which the Prisoner observed, "I don't wish any body to come here for me, I am here to answer for my own deeds."

Mr. HICKS— "Your friends may be admitted. Prisoner: but the Noble Lord cannot speak to your person at all; ; he only speaks to the conduct and character of the mob."

Mr. GIFFORD— "Prisoner, you will have justice done to you." His Lordship's evidence being resumed.- The holes were of that size which he had seen made by shot fired out of an air gun, made in the shape of a stick, about the size of a pen.

Mr. ADOLPHUS, Counsel for the Prisoner, now made his appearance, and Mr. HICKS told him, that although the examination was fixed for twelve o'clock, he had proceeded with it, as his Lordship was anxious to go away as soon as possible, and it was not material to the Prisoner, as his Lordship could not identify him.

Mr. ADOLPHUS thanked Mr. HICKS for the politeness that dictated such an explanation.

TO DO Lord Murray's evidence resumed. " When we got het Wlv Marlborough-gardens and the Stable- van!, a large s!n n ,» „" thrown against the window,'and so much «f the par t foes U fg| a got into my eyes that ! could scarcely see." Mr. Gifford— " Can your Lordship say whether any >t 0ll( , were thrown after the "glass had been p-rfoi Hted >"— a. h ( think some stones were thrown behiad ; about ten yards af !er the carriage had passed Marlborough Gardens, br tweei>^, fr]) and the stable-yard, a large stone was thrown, which fractur^ the glass; it was thrown with so much violence as lon.^Utri?, toe glass; some pieces stuck into his Lordship's foreheau', and 3onte of the larger pieces of glass fell in the carriage, andV'm- into the road. Witness put up his hand to his eyes, and \, nia , diately afterwards seven or eight stone* were thrown, W |„ f ?? struck different parts of the carriage. There we ie no stone. o 'i the description of those so thrown in the road. His Lordship had since seen the carriage, and he found it 10 be deeply indmftf Mr.fliCK.i- " Your Lordship had better conclude the evident appertaining to the stone; being Hirown." His l.ordshiy w astonished to find that the stones recoiled from the glass, J? tween Marlborough House and the Stable-yard, there »«•• " great many very large stoiies thrown; they flew thickest tt|, the carriage was turning round in ihe Stable-yard ; some of >i 1 were as big as his fist. .Mr. Gifford— " My opinion is, that -I stones were thrown in ordei to obliterate the two holes. "_"i >" I don't think the mob saw the holes ; it nrgbt have been so. > ihe advice of his Royal Highness, I put up my hat to the brok glass. I have examined the state carriage since, and have,] covered several indentions in the pannel near the glass. The were four or five indentions near the place where his Royal Highness sat. I went to the Perk yesterday, for the nurpi, of ascertaining the precise spot where the carriage W; J , ?? c tacked, and L found a great many stones there. I looked jn the trees, and was astonished to find, that between Marlborough House and the Stable-yard, in every other tree then- w erf v great many stones." In answer to some questions put hy M. AnoLPiius, his Lordship suid, that his Royal Highness Prince sat in the centre of the carriage; Iherts wa« ru ppr„,!r r „ ,! on either side of him. ft was usual for the officers of guards i* ride near the window, but in the present case he believed th- ine officers had gone bark to look, after some of the innb. ?? Lordship then withdrew. All the depositions taken on the first examination were i ue . read to Mr. Adolphcs, who was permitted to t..ke a note ol such parts as he thought would be necessary to the defence of the prisoner on bis trial. Mr. Hicks— " If there are any persons present who ;nw ih„ atrocious attack upon the Rfgent, it is ihrir duty, as gnodawl loyal subjects, to come forward and give liieir evidence. [< there any person here that knows the prisoner ?" A voice from the crowd — " I do." Mr. Hicks—' 4 Then come forward." The person si^pn^ forward. His name, he said, was James Moorhouse, and he lived at No. 39; Newington-causeway. On Tuesday last br went to the Park, to see the procession to the House; liesioud on the top of the hill near Carlton House; there was a grem deal of hissing and hooting, which witness was very sorry to hear. Witness continued in the Park until the procession if. turned, and went towards the stable-yard ; he got stationed ii the crowd, just beyond Marlborough House, on the right siv of the middle walk. Witness was rather before the rarria't when he saw the prisoner once or Iw ice. Witness was f[isitenut of his person, as he had seen him before about town; he appeared to be pressing forward, and was very active in the m»j. Witness saw him a second nrae near (he life-guardsmen (Lar- cock). Witness saw a stone thrown, but could not say ihe pii. soner threw it ; it came from the place where the prisoner «a standing; he saw an aim raised up, but he could not say it was the prisoner's. Witness saw no more of the prisoner; lie got near Lord Harrington's windows, and saw a° boy >ibout 15 16 years of age throwing stones at the carriage Witness ai. tempted to seize him, but could not, as the pressure of ike crowd was so great. The stones struck the Royal carriage ;he should know the boy again. Witness went to the House of Correction on Thursday, and immediately identified the prisoner. Robert Turner was next called. The whole amount of in evidence was, that he saw a man throw a stone at the carrtap and it broke the window, but he did not know it was the prisoner. Prisoner — "* Here is a man behind who will speak to my m duct on the occasion." Mr. ADoLPHUs did not wish, in the present stage of die ba new, that he should call any witnesses. Mr. Hicks stated -to the prisoner ihat, for his own satisfaction he would tell him that his Counsel was attending there (own and watch the evidence against him, and the force of its low his defence was at present unnecessary. Mr. Givford- " We should be acting as Judge", and not Magistrates, if we were to assume the competency of hear evidence." Prisoner — " Feeling as I do, conscious of my innocence, should like to be acquitted to-day." He begged thai his hi ness might be heaid. A man, named Chanter, then stepped forward, ami Mr. Hicks asked him if he had nut seen him before ? If he hail not been before him at Vlarlborough-street. Chanter said he had. Mr. Hicks asked him for what? " X necking down a watchman," he rejoined. Mr. Hicks— "I shall not examine you : yon hail better go home; the prisoner is not put upon his defence" Chanter — " Well, your worship, why cannot I be heard.'' Mr. Hicks — " It is not allowed, Sir ; I will commit you if you are so impertinent." Mr. AnoLPnts. — As this is not a final examination, and si no determination will be come to this day as to what count may ultimately be taken ?? to my client, I do nut consider this a proper opportunity to offer any remarks in bil behalf. I can only say, I am prepared with respectable, owl, who would answer for his appearance, if that would lie accepted; but knowing the view which you (Mr. Hicks) take of his crime, I fear ?? to offer bail would be quite useless. It a not for me now to question the opinion, which, as a Magistrate, you may have formed of the Prisoner's conduct, or of the evidence submitted against him ; oa a future occasion, when you mind shall be made up, it will then be my duty to submit such remarks as may suggest themselves to me, on the new I fi» v lake of the case, as well us pursue such other course as i.m interest of my client may demand. Mr. Hicks — A Magistrate in all cases, more especially in on? like this, of such high moment, must be anxious that the ?"• soner should have the assistance if counsel. In the present in- stance, the Prisoner could not have been m«re fortunate in l»» selection. You, Mr. Adolphus, gay, >ou know the opinion which I have formed of this case; it may not, therefore, be necessary to state it. I have no hesitation in stating, however, that my impressions against the Prisoner at present is of tie most serious nature; I shall have great pleasure, if, hereafter, I can avoid fully committing this man for the crime of high treason. In a case of so much importance I do not mean to act with precipitation; I shall certainly consult all the great points of the law before I commit. At this instant I think the evidence which has been submitted distinctly proves the commission of three different acts of high treason. How far the Prisoner may have participated in these acts is the question which remains to be decided. Under these circumstances feel it my duty to remand the Prisoner until Wednesday.

Mr. ADOLPHUS then applied for permission for the Prisoner to be attended by his Solicitor. This was conceded.

A patrole now produced some large stones which had taKen from the trees in St. James's-park, near the spot where the attack had been made.

This man was desired to attend the next examination, and the Prisoner was removed from the bar.

The Prisoner, in the course of his examination, repeatedly declared his innocence and his willingness to stand the test of every inquiry.

Information has been received by Mr. HICKS tending in a great measure to confirm the belief that it was intended to attempt the Regent's life, but this in no respects affects or applies to the Prisoner.

An Officer, who was present during the examination and who had served with the army in Spain, upon hearing the description of the holes made on the plate glass, said, he had known many instances of balls striking plate glass and rebounding. having first pulverized the spot which they had struck so as to create a circular fracture without destroying the glass altogether.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18170206/009/0003
Morning Chronicle - Thursday 06 February 1817

PUBLIC OFFICE, BOW-STREET.— The further examination of the case of THOMAS SCOTT, charged as one of the persons implicated in the late disgraceful and atrocious outrage on the person of the Prince Regent, was resumed yesterday at this Office.

Lieutenant Martin, of the 2d Regiment of Guards, stated that Major Vyse commanded the squadron on duty. It was the duty of the Major to ride on one side of the royal carriage, and of a Subaltern on the other, with their horses heads as close as possible to the windows. From the shouting and pressure of the mob, the horses became frightened, and could not be kept in that situation. After passing Carlton House, on the return from the House of Lords, witness was on the near side. Townsend, the police officer told him the window had been fired at.—Witness saw a fracture in the glass, but in his opinion it was too small for a ball. The glass was starred. Several stones were afterwards thrown, some of which struck him on the back. It was usual on those occasions for the officers to have a corporal on the outside of them, just to cover them.

Corporal Howcroft was next called. He could not say that he should know the face of any person in the crowd. His officer. Lieut. Martin, kept as near the carriage as possible.

John Armstrong, one of the officers of Worship-street, said he was stationed in the Park, with five other officers, under the direction of Mr. Gifford, between Marlborough House and the Stable-yard. As the royal carriage proceeded to the House, there was groaning and hissing among the mob. Witness and the other officers kept their station until the return of the procession. The people then tried to break through them (the Officers). After the coach had passed, Mr. Gifford said, there was something wrong. They went towards the place, and saw Laycock, the Life Guardsman, on his horse, and Mr. Chambers and the Prisoner, Scott, without their hats. They took the latter into custody. The mob were very riotous. Witness told them that a Magistrate was present, and he would see justice done. He did not know at that time that any accident had happened to the carriage. He took the Prisoner to the guard-house.

John Webb, one of the Yeomen of the Guard, was stationed on the near side, close to the door of the carriage. On the return from the House of Lords, he observed the glass of the carriage cracked, about a hundred yards from the Horse Guards, near the great gun. When they had got about half way up the back of the Prince's garden, he observed that the glass was struck again—he told Townsend of the circumstance.— The second stone thrown at the carriage he picked up. Before they got to the Stable-yard, more than twenty stones were thrown, besides potatoes and apples, some of which struck witness. A very large stone broke the glass between Marlborough-house and the Stable-yard. He observed two or three persons in the crowd whom he should know. One of them was a taller man than the Prisoner; he wore a shallow hat and brown coat. Witness did not see the Prisoner.

Mr. W. Dawes was in the Park as an observer. There was a great deal of indignant language as the carriage passed and returned. He saw the prisoner standing by the Life-guardsman, and the latter seizing him by the collar, The prisoner had previously lifted his umbrella, but in the opinion of witness, it was in self-defence, to prevent his being kicked by the horse. He was confirmed in this opinion, from the opportunity which the prisoner had to escape if he wished, while the Life-guardsman was turning his horse about.

Mr. Hicks, the Magistrate who presided on the Bench with Mr. Gifford, lamented that out of the number of persons present in the Park, not one had been taken into custody except the prisoner, where hundreds might have been seized, and no person had come forward except Mr. Chambers. The country must be for ever obliged to that Gentleman. Had there been less evidence than the present the prisoner would still be highly criminal, as he took no pains to quell the riot. Upon a review of the evidence, however, he felt it his duty to discharge him from the charge of treason, but he must commit him for a misdemeanour, in aiding and assisting in the riot. At the same time he would admit him to bail, in two sureties in 100l. each, and himself in 200l.; and as he had suffered a week imprisonment, he would not require the usual notice of 24 hours.

Mr. Price, the prisoner's Solicitor, said, he would procure the bail required immediately.

[TH: the bail was a large sum; who would cover the bail and why?]

---