# The March of the Blanketeers

Spring, 1817. A report from the Secret Committee convinces the Government that the risk of revolt is real. In Parliament, they are keen to suspend the Habeas Corpus act, an assertion of state power that would allow suspected rebels to be taken up without evidence.

## Report of the Secret Committee

The Secret Committee produces its report in the middle of February, 1817.

```{admonition} Report of the Secret Committee, February 1817
:class: dropdown seealso
https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/lords/1817/feb/18/report-of-the-secret-committee-of-the
REPORT OF THE SECRET COMMITTEE OF THE HOUSE OF LORDS RESPECTING CERTAIN DANGEROUS MEETINGS AND COMBINATIONS.
HL Deb 18 February 1817 vol 35 cc411-20
```

As a result, the *Habeas Corpus Suspension Bill* is presented to Parliament.

```{admonition} Habeas Corpus Suspension Bill
:class: dropdown seealso
https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/lords/1817/feb/21/habeas-corpus-suspension-bill

HABEAS CORPUS SUSPENSION BILL.

HL Deb 21 February 1817 vol 35 cc491-2

Lord Sidmouth said, that he was prepared, on coming down to the House that day, to have gone fully into the subject itself, and to have communicated the grounds on which his majesty's government felt it imperative to recommend the measure now about to be submitted to the consideration of their lordships. From the wish expressed by a number of the members of that House, he was willing to defer the discussion on the bill he then held in his hand until the second reading, which he should fix for Monday, at the same time communicating his intention of forwarding it through its various stages on that night. He then moved, that a bill intituled "An act to empower his majesty to secure and detain such persons as his majesty shall suspect are conspiring against his person and government," be now read a first time.

```

Following the report of the Committee of Secrecy, the House of Commons met to discuss it on February 24th, 1817 ([Hansard, vol 35 cc590-639](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1817/feb/24/seditious-meetings-bill)), with Lord Castlereagh arguing that "parliament would find it now not only necessary to revive the act of the 39th of the king, but also that of the 36th, commonly known by the name of the Sedition act."

In particular:

> [T]he measures which he should propose, as the most wise which parliament could adopt, were—1st. The temporary suspension of the Habeas Corpus act. 2nd. To extend the act of 1795 for the security of his majesty's person, to his royal highness the Prince Regent, as the person exercising the functions of royalty. 3rd. To embody into one act the provisions of the act of 1795, relative to tumultuous meetings and debating societies, and the provisions of the act of the 39th of the King, which declared the illegality of all societies bound together by secret oaths, or if not by secret oaths, which extended itself by fraternized branches over the kingdom; and to make it enact, that the nominating delegates or commissioners, under any pretext, to any other society of the kind, should be considered as sufficient proof of the illegality of such societies or associations. 4th. To make such enactments as should be thought most effectual to punish with the utmost rigour any attempt to gain over soldiers or sailors to act with any association or set of men, and withdraw them from their allegiance.

```{admonition} Progress through Parliament
:class: seealso

For Hansard records on the progress of the *Suspension of Habeas Corpus Bill* and another Bill introduced in response to the report of the Secret Committee, the *Seditious Meetings Bill*, see [here](./61_habeas_corpus_seditious_meetings_bills.md).
```

In Manchester, a crowd gathers on Monday, March 3rd, 1817, to call on the Prince Regent to withold Royal Assent for the Bill, and to debate Radical Reform.

But the voice of the dissenters carried little weight, and the Bill received Royal Assent.

```{admonition} Royal Assent, March 1812
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000612/18170308/007/0002
Durham County Advertiser - Saturday 08 March 1817

(By Express) London, Wednesday evening March 5.

The Royal Assent was given by Commission yesterday to the Habeas Corpus Suspension Act.
```

```{admonition} Two Bills in Parliament, March 1817
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000389/18170304/001/0001?browse=true
Chester Courant - Tuesday 04 March 1817

BRITISH PARLIAMENT

House of Lords, FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 21, 1817.

Lord SIDMOUTH introduced a Bill, the title of which was, "A Bill to enable his Majesty to secure and detain in custody such persons as his Majesty shall suspect of treasonable intentions against his Majesty's Person and Government." His Lordship proposed the second reading of the Bill on Monday, and he should then move, that it pass through two stages on the same night. Lord Holland trusted, that the Ministers of the Crown would be able to come down to the House on Monday to show grounds for the measure they proposed. He trusted, that, to induce Parliament to adopt them at once, and in one day, the dates, circumstances, and extent of the practices that called for them would be particularly pointed out, and satisfactorily supported.—The Bill was to be read a second time on Monday.

MONDAY, FEBRUARY 24.

SUSPENSION OF THE HABEAS CORPUS ACT.

Lord SIDMOUTH moved the Order of the Day for the second reading of the Bill to enable his Majesty to secure and detain in custody persons suspected of designs against his Person and Government.—After an animated debate, their Lordsbips divided, when there were:—

Contents 86  
Proxies 64—150  
Non-Contents, 12  
Proxies 23-35  
Majority, ———— 115!

Their Lordships then went into a Committee, and reported.—The Bill was then read the third time, and passed, and ordered to be sent to the House of Commons.
```

Also in the *Chester Courant* that week, a report on the Secret Committee, and its supposed finding that the lower classes in the manufacturing cities were planning an uprising that could take place imminently.

```{admonition} Report of the Secret Committee, March 1817
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000389/18170304/001/0001?browse=true
Chester Courant - Tuesday 04 March 1817

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 19. REPORT OF THE SECRET COMMITTEE.

Mr. B. BATHURST appeared at the Bar with the Report of the Committee of Secrecy.

The Report commences by stating the conviction of the Committee, that attempts had been recently made to take advantage of the distresses of the labouring and manufacturing classes of the nation, with a view not only to effect a Parliamentary Reform, on the principle of Universal Suffrage, but to cause the total overthrow of all our Institutions, and of every description of landed and funded property. That this system of spoliation chiefly proceeded from the doctrines maintained by a number of Societies, distinguished by the title of "Spenceans," who held out Parliamentary Retorm as the ostensible object of their efforts, but which was, in fact, only a half measure. In other societies, founded on the Spencean principle, it had been maintained, that the only remedy for the grievances of the people was, to hunt down the land-owners, and to deprive those still greater wretches, the fund-holders, of their pretended rights. It appeared also, that these and similar societies had been guilty of the most blasphemous and inflammatory proceedings; and that their political discussions were followed hy songs of the most inflammatory and seditious description, and by the recitation of profane parodies of the Liturgy, and of various parts of the Holy Scriptures. The Report then adverts to the efforts made to extend these principles over the whole kingdom. These were principally by means of speeches at public meetings, and the dispersion of cheap, and, in many instances, gratuitous, publications, unfolding the doctrines of the societies. That it had been proved to the entire satisfaction of the Committee, that a number of the members conceived and declared, that, in their opinion, the objects which they had in view might be, and ought to be, insured by an effort of the physical strength of the people to overpower the Constitutional Authorities. That it appeared to the Committee, that a plan was formed, by a sudden rising, in the dead of night, to surprise the soldiers, to set fire to the Metropolis, in several places, and to take possession of the Barracks, the Tower, and the Bank. That a formidable machine was invented, with which the streets should be cleared of all opposing force. This plan was, however, relinquished as premature; and it was resolved to discover the strength of the popular party, by convening meetings, under the pretext of taking into consideration the legal mode of redressing grievances; and a map of London having been examined, Spafields was selected as the place whence an attack on the Bank and thé Tower could, with the greatest facility, be made. That seditious placards were exhibited, of one of which the following is a copy:—

"Britons to arms! The whole country only waits the signal from London. Break open the gunsmiths'. Arm yourselves with all sorts of instruments. No rise in the price of bread. No Regent. No Castlereagh. Off with their heads! No Taxes. No Bishops; they are only useless lumber.

"N. B.—5000 of these bills are posted up in the town, and in the parts of the neighbourhood."

That the intended insurrection assumed all the symbols of the French Revolution: that a Committee of Safety was formed, consisting of twenty-four members; that flags and cockades were prepared for the occasion; and that the adjournment of the first Spafields meeting was to afford time to accelerate the projected undertaking. The Report then details the means used in the interval of the meeting to take advantage of every circumstance which could further the attainment of the object. The circulation of inflammatory publications; the raising of subscriptions for the support of the agents employed; attempts to seduce the soldiers, by giving them hopes of promotion, and exciting discontent among them by a story of the landing of a foreign force ia this country; carefully noting the shops and other places where arms were deposited; and trying to seduce the sailors, by offering them a prospect of additional pay under the new government. That immediately before the meeting of the 2d December, many persons concerned with the proceedings procured arms of various descriptions, and encouraged the manufacturing of tri-coloured ribbons, One individual had actually made and delivered 250 pike heads. It was also undoubtedly intended to liberate the prisoners in the principal gaols in and about the Metropolis, in the hope of their concurrence and assistance in the intended insurrection. The Report then relates the particulars of the hiring of the waggon for the 2d December, and of the riotous scenes which succeeded. In reviewing the whole of the transactions of the 2d December," adds the Report, "your Committee are firmly persuaded, that, however improbable the success of such a plan may appear, it was yet deliberately premeditated by desperate men, who calculated, without reasonable ground, upon defection in their opposers, and upon active support from those multitudes whose distress they had witnessed, and whom they had vainly instigated to revolt. That, consequeatly, it was mot merely the sudden ebullition of the moment, or the unauthorized attempt of any unconnected individual. Your Committee are farther convinced, that, notwithstanding the failure on the 2d December, the same designs still continue to be prosecuted with sanguine hopes of success."

Having thus stated the general result of the evidence which had been laid before them, respecting the state of the Metropolis, the Committee call the attention of the House to what has been passing during the same period in different parts of the country. The first thing which has here forced itself upon their observation is, the widely diffused rablification of a system of Clubs, associated, professedly, for the purpose of Parliamentary Reform, upon the most extended principle of Universal Suffrage and Annual Parliaments. These Clubs, in general, designate themselves by the name of Hampden Clubs. On the professed object of their institution, they appear to be in communication and connexion with the Club of that name in London. The leading members are active in the circulation of publications likely to promote their object. The communication between these Clubs takes place by means of Delegates. The Committee has no hesitation in saying, from information on which they place full reliance, that, in far the greatest number of them, and particularly in those which are established in the great manufacturing districts of Lancashire, Leicestershire, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire, and which are composed of the lower order of artisans, nothing short of a Revolution is the object expected and avowed. The doctrines of the Spencean Clubs have been widely diffused throughout country, either by the extension of similar societies, or more frequently by the intervention of Missionaries or Delegates, whose object it is to propagate these doctrines in every society to which they have access. The members pay a small weekly subscription, which provides a fund for the expenses of these Missionaries, and also for the purchase of seditious tracts, which are read and commented on at their meetings. Some of the tracts inculcate the necessity of overturning what they call 'The Privileged Class,' as distinguished from the people. A new order is declared to be the will of the people; rebellion is justified by the assertion, that a Nation cannot be a rebel; and all religion is disavowed, as well as loyalty, by the assertion, in answer to the question, "Would you live without Gods or Kings?" "We abjure tyranny of every kind." It seems, indeed, to be a part of the system adopted by those societies, to prepare the minds of the people, for the destruction of the present frame of society, by undermining, not only their habits of decent and regular subordination, but all the principles of morality and religion. Topics for discussion are selected with this view: among others the questions "Whether the Jacobin or the Loyalist was the best friend to his country?" A general idea seems prevalent among those who compose these societies, that some fixed day, at no very great distance, is to be appointed for a general rising. About Manchester, and some other places, the greatest exultation was manifested previous to the meeting in Spafields, on the 2d of December; and the taking of the Tower and the ruin of the Bank were publicly and confidently predicted. The news of the result was impatiently expected; the roads were crowded during the night with a number of persons, many of them Delegates from the different societies in the country, waiting for the arrival of the mail-coach; and the disappointment was not concealed, when it was ascertained, that the riot had been quelled without much serious or extensive mischief. It appears that the confidence of the disaffected is such, that they present members enrolled as amounting to several hindred thousands, and that their societies are daily increasing; that in their lists they distinguish, by particular marks, those among their subscribers who are able-bodied men, and ready to act when required; and that they also keep a list of those who refuse to join them in what they call the "Black Book;" and threaten vengeance against those persons when the general insurrection shall take place. In some parts of one populous county, where nearly every village has its Hampden Club, the members make it no secret, that they consider themselves as being of no other use than as being ready to act whenever they are called upon: on their admission they are said to be listed, and receive a secret card, with the words "Be Ready, Be Steady." The habits and manners of these persons seem entirely changed; they already calculate upon the share of land which each is to possess, and point out the destruction of the churches, as the necessary consequence of their success. It appears that preparations are in progress, in several places, for providing arms. The facility of converting implements of husbandry into offensive weapons has been suggested; and persons have been sent to observe the state of particular places, where depots of arms, for the public service, were supposed to have been formed. A similar system of secret association has been extended to the manufacturing population of Glasgow, and some other populous towns of Scotland; and the Committee are firmly persuaded, from the information which has been laid before them, that their ultimate object is the overthrow by force of the existing form of Government. In conclusion, the Committee express great satisfaction that the system of extending disaffection and secret societies has been confined to the principal manufacturing counties, and that few, if any, of the higher orders, or even of the middle class of society, and scarcely any of the agricultural population, have lent themselves to the more violent of these projects. But, with all these allowances, the Committee cannot contemplate the activity and arts of the leaders in this conspiracy, and the numbers whom they have already seduced and may seduce; the oaths by which many of them are bound together; the means suggested and prepared for the forcible attainment of their objects; the nature of the objects themselves, which are not only the overthrow of all the institutions of the kingdom, but also such a subversion of the rights and principles of property, as must necessarily lead to general confusion, plunder, and bloodshed; without submitting to the mest serious attention of the House the dangers which exist, and which the utmost vigilance of Government, under the existing laws, has been found inadequate to prevent.
 
On the motion of Lord Castlereagh, the Report was ordered to be printed, and taken into consideration on Monday.

MONDAY, FEBRUARY 24.

REPORT OF THE SECRET COMMITTEE, 

The Order of the Day for taking into consideration the Report of the Secret Committee, having been read.

Lord CASTLEREAGH addressed the House at great length, and concluded by stating, that the measures which he should propose, as the most wise which Parliament could adept, were—

1st. The temporary Suspension of the Habeas Corpus.

2d. To extend the Act of 1795 for the Security of his Majesty's Person, to his Royal Highness the Prince Regent, as the Person exercising the Functions of Royalty.

3d. To embody into one Act the Provisions of the Act of 1795, relative to Tumultuous Meetings and Debating Societies, and the provisions of the Act of the 39th of the King, which declared the illegality of all Societies bound together by secret oaths, or if not by secret oaths, which extended itself by fraternised branches over the kingdom; and to make it enact, that the nominating Delegates or Commissioners, under any pretext, to any other Society of the kind, should be considered as sufficient proof of the illegality of such Societies or Associations.

4th. To make such enactments as shall be thought most effectual to punish with the utmost rigour any attempt to gain over Soldiers or Sailors to act with any association or set of men, and withdraw them from their allegiance.

In the course of the debate Mr. Canning delivered a most eloquent speech; and the Speaker declared that the language of Lord Cochrane was only calculated to encourage resistance to the laws.

The House divided on the first motion—"That leave be given to bring in a Bill to suppress seditious meetings."

For the Motion 190  
Against it 14  
Majority for bringing in the first Bill... 176!!!

LORD CASTLEREAGH brought in the Bill for the more effectual prevention of Seditious Assemblies. The Bill read a first, and ordered to be read a second time on Wednesday.

The Bills for rendering more penal the attempts to seduce the soldiers and sailors of his Majesty's Army and Navy; and for extending the provisions of an Act for the protection of his Majesty's Person to the Prince Regent, were brought in, and were severally read a first, and ordered to be read a second time on Wednesday, and to be printed.— Adjourned at half-past twelve.

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 25.

Sir M. W. RIDLEY moved for an Address to the Prince Regent, praying him to give directions that the number of Lords of the Admiralty should be reduced. A smart debate ensued.——Lord Castlereagh stated, as a proof that the Finance Committee was not appointed for the purpose of evading the question of economy and retrenchment, that they had agreed to recommend the abolition of all Sinecures, after the interest of the present possessors had expired. On a division there appeared for the Address 159, against it 201 *(sic; 207, presumably)*, being a majority in favor of Ministers of only 58.

Sir F. BURDETT presented the Westminster Petition against the Suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act; and hoped, that the Gentlemen of England would come forward at the present crisis to direct and regulate the public deliberation and associations as they had done in England's best days. He compared the apathy of the present day to the conduct of the first rate characters in Spain during the late contest.

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 26.

LORD CASTLEREAGH moved the first reading of the Habeas Corpus Suspension Bill.— Mr. BENNETT rose to oppose it, and concluded in the following words—"I will never consent, therefore, to surrender the rights of the people without such necessity into the hand of such Ministers as the Noble Lord, who would abuse the power intrusted to them, who had already IMBRUED THEIR HANDS IN THE BLOOD OF THEIR COUNTRY, who had been GUILTY of CRIMINAL CRUELTIES."—*Cries of order, order!*

Lord CASTLEREAGH spoke to order. He felt it his duty to call upon the Hon. Member to state which individual Member of the present Government had criminally imbrued his hands in the blood of his country.

Mr. BENNETT said he charged the members of his Majesty's Government in their official situations, with having before called for the very same powers which they now required, and with having abused the trust then reposed in them, and afterwards covered their misconduct with a Bill of Indemnity.

Lord CASTLEREAGH—I have then to say that if it has been asserted that I ever criminally imbrued my hands in the blood uf my country, the Hon. Member has stated that which is a falsehood.

Lord MILTON rose to order, He anxiously hoped the business of the Honourable Gentleman and the Noble Lord would go no further. He (Mr. Bennett) had then stated, not that the Noble Lord had criminally imbrued his hands in the blood of his country, but that Ministers had acted criminally under the law tor suspending the Habeas Corpus Act, and had afterwards obtained a Bill of Indemnity.
 
LORD CASTLEREAGH wished to know the nature of the imputed criminality. If he had been guilty of a crime of the nature of that ascribed (as he had understood) to him, it was that which no Bill of Indemnity could cover. He therefore repeated if such conduct had been imputed to him, the Honourable Member had stated a falsehood.
 
The LORD ADVOCATE of Scotland stated, that on the 22d inst. by an order of the Sheriff and Civil at Glasgow, *eighteen* persons were apprehended on a charge of treasonable practices, and committed to prison. They were taken in close consultation. Five or six more who were present, by some means escaped. They were persons, much above the lower orders of people. The following is a form of the oath, by which the conspiracy was cemented: "In awful presence of God, I, A. B. do voluntarily swear, that I will persevere in my endeavouring to form a brotherhood of affection amongst Britons of every description, who are considered worthy of confidence; and that I will persevere in my endeavours to obtain for all the people in Great Britain and Ireland, not disqualified by crimes or insanity, the elective franchise at the age of 21 with free and equal representation, annual Parliaments: *(hear, hear, from the Opposition,)* and that I will support the same to the utmost of my power, either by moral or physical strength *(shouts of Hear)*, as the case may require; and I do further swear, that neither hopes, fears, or punishment, shall induce me to inform or give evidence against any member or members, collectively or individually, for any act or expression done or made in or out in this or similar societies, under punishment of death, to be inflicted on me by any member or members of such society. So help me God, and keep we steadfast."

After a long and heated debate, the House divided; for the Suspension 273; against 98: majority 175.

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 27.

A great number of Petitions was presented against the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, and praying Parliamentary Reform, They were severally read, and ordered to lie on the table.—A petition was presented from Thos. Evans, stating that he had been apprehended by a warrant from Lord Sidmouth, and expressing his apprehension of being confined some time if the Habeas Corpus Act should be suspended, The petition concluded by praying relief on the premises. The petition was ordered to be laid on the table.— The Chancellor of the Exchequer moved the order of the day for the House going into a Committee upon the Habeas Corpus Act Suspension Bill.— The bill was ordered to be read a third time to-morrow.

FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 28, THIRD READING of the BILL for THE SUSPENSION OF THE HABEAS CORPUS ACT.

The Bill for the Suspension of the Habeas Corpus was read a third time this evening and passed, after a very long debate, in which, as bas been the case on every discussion of the Bill, the opposers had to contend with the overwhelming weight of the two Reports of the Secret Committees; to oppose general assertions to decisive facts; and to attempt to overthrow strength of argument by strength of declamation.

Mr. M. A. TAYLOR declared that be had never been a Cabinet Minister, nor supposed he ever should be, and introduced a circumstance which he conceived ought to operate strongly against the passing of the Bill.—"When Arthur O'Connor was forced to leave Ireland on account of being an United Irishman, he brought letters of introduction to several persons in this country, and among others to himself. Whilst he, the said Arthur, visited at his house, he saw nothing in his conduct that could have led him to suspect he was an United Irishman. But, before he was apprehended, he was traced from his house to several Meetings of United Irishmen, Now suppose his, (Mr. Taylor's) character had not been what it was, what might have been his situation?—He might have been taken up under the Habeas Corpus Suspension Act."

Mr. WINDHAM QUIN put one point in a very clear view—"It had been objected to the present measure that on former occasions, when there was actual rebellion, when there was a mutiny at the Nore, the suspension of the Habeas Corpus was not resorted to. The reason was obvious. It was a measure of precaution, of prevention, and there was no good in adopting it after the explosion had taken place."

Mr. BANKES considered the measure to be a necessary measure of prevention; and as prevention was better than punishment, it would be wise and humane to check the disaffected in their career before they arrived at those excesses which would endanger not only their own lives; but the lives of others.

The ATTORNEY-GENERAL conveyed to the House the information that several publications which had been so extensively complained of, as tending to inflame and excite the people to outrage, were under prosecution.

On the division for the third reading of the Bill, the majority for it was 162. A second division took place on a clause moved for shortening the duration of it to the 20th of May; 142 were against the clause.

No division took place on the question for passing of the Bill; but when it was put, the Opposition

—————————————— bark'd  
With wide Cerberean mouths full loud, and rung  
A hideous peal;

The cry of No resounded from their side of the House.— But noise is not argument, and clamour is the resource of those who are equally weak in argument and in numbers.

And so the Bill has passed both Houses, and is to receive the Royal Assent on Monday.

```

```{admonition} Suspension of Habeas Corpus Act, 1817
:class: dropdown seealso
https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=ft4BxiUBdxgC&printsec=frontcover&source=gbs_ge_summary_r&cad=0#v=onepage&q&f=false

- 57 Geo. 3. c. 3: An Act to empower His Majesty to secure and detain such Persons as His Majesty shall suspect are conspiring against His Person and Government [4th March 1817] https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=ft4BxiUBdxgC&pg=PA3#v=onepage&q&f=false

- 57 Geo. 3. c. 55: An Act to continue an Act to empower His Majesty to secure and detain such Persons as His Majesty shall suspect are conspiring against His Person and Government [30th June 1817] https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=ft4BxiUBdxgC&pg=PA193#v=onepage&q&f=false
 
```

In Manchester, a large crowd gathered around St. Peter's Church on Monday, March 3rd, 1817. Those assembled called on the Prince Regent to withhold his assent from the Bill for the Suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, and to provide due consideration regarding Parliamentary Reform.

```{admonition} A political throng, March 1817
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001255/18170306/013/0002
Public Ledger and Daily Advertiser - Thursday 06 March 1817

The following copied from Tuesday's *Manchester Mercury*:— "The environs of St. Peter's Church were yesterday the resort of another political throng, and the declared purpose of the Meeting was to address his Royal Highness the Prince Regent to withhold his assent to the Bill for the Suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, as well as to take into further consideration the topic of Radical Reform. Some industry been employed to attract a numerous attendance of the population in various directions around us, and our Magistrates and principal town Officers, with their wonted energy and promptitude left nothing undone that prudence might dictate, to be prepared in the event of any attempt at outrage; an accession to our military force was obtained by the arrival from Bolton of three companies of the 54th regiment of foot, who were held in perfect readiness during the proceedings, to act if there should be occasion for their interference; the civil power were also fully prepared to do their duty: happily no emergency arose to their presence. From half-past twelve to about half-past three was occupied upon the usual themes of declamation: it was altogether deemed useless to continue any further applications upon the several subjects of complaint; and the meeting dissolved without the specification of any ulterior projects—the orators retiring from their rostrum unable to conceal the most conclusive symptoms of having as bountifully indulged the interior of their persons as the obduracy of the elements had pelted the surface of their mortal frames."
```

At the start of the following week, Monday, March 10th, 1817, ([Hansard, HC Deb 10 March 1817 vol 35, cc931-45](https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1817/mar/10/seditious-meetings-bill)), the "Seditious Meeting Bill" was recommitted to the House of Commons, along with an amendment that proposed *"inflicting the punishment of death on such persons as shall not disperse after being required so to do"*. The amendment was strongly defeated and the bill read for the second time.

A story from the *Exchange Herald*, which was widely syndicated around the country, including the London press, tells the story of what happened next.

```{admonition} The blanket story gained ground, March 1817
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000365/18170315/010/0003
Carlisle Patriot - Saturday 15 March 1817

MANCHESTER, MARCH 11.

After the meeting of the Reformers broke up on Monday the 3rd inst. we heard amongst a variety of reports as to the result of their deliberations, a vague indistinct story of a motion to meet again on the following Monday (yesterday), prepared with blankets to proceed to London, to lay their sufferings and their petitions before the Prince Regent, whom it seems, they (all or other) professed to hold in high respect and veneration, whilst the most vile and approbious epithets were levelled at his Ministers. During the week, the blanket story gained ground; and a report of sixty thousand Scottish Reformers being on their way towards London, and that they had even advanced as far as Preston, was prevalent; whilst accounts of individual preparation tor the intended march, continually met the ear. There were many persons, however, who did not put any faith in the "often told tale" till Saturday last, when a placard of which the following is a copy, was exhibited on the walls of this town and its neighbourhood:—

"PUBLIC MEETING

"The Inhabitants of MANCHESTER and its vicinity are respectfully informed that a PUBLIC MEETING regarding to adjournement, will be held near St Peter's Church on Monday morning the 10th of March 1817, when it is hoped that every person who is determined to carry his Petition to London, will assemble peaceably and orderly, and provide himself with the necessary means of support requisite to bear him through this loyal and necessary undertaking.

"It is hoped that these friends of Parliamentary Reform, who possess the means, will come forward on this important occasion.

"Persons will be appointed to receive contributions this evening at New Islington, and at the meeting on Monday. W OGDEN, Printer, 28 Wood Street."

Still we should have been sceptical in respect of the report of the intention of the intimated people to proceed to London and should have thought the foregoing placard the result of a determination of some one to laugh at credulity, if it had not been the imprint of a person who had distinguished himself on the cart at all the preceding meetings, by haranguing the gaping gulls who surrounded the temporary alter of sedition. His oratorical labours are however suspended but early on Sunday morning, he was arrested in his bed, and conveyed to the New Bailey Prison, nearly at the same time with one Johnstone, a tailor (the Missionary who was dispatched by the Lancashire Reformers to convert the Staffordshire Potters to the new political faith); who we are told, has distinguished himself in this neighbourhood for several months past, as one of the most violent of demagogues who have endeavoured to make the working classes subservient to the too evident design of disorganizing society, and destroying the Constitution.

That many persons, willing to labour, have lately wanted employment. we believe: and that of this description some would be found at political meetings; but we also believe, that by far a greater number who are too idle for labour for their bread and who wish for an easier, or rather more luxurious life, swelled their numbers. Both these descriptions are able to be misled by designing orators; and are easily hurried on by the impulsive stream, put in motion by the bad spirits who join mobs of all kinds, in the hope that the consequent bustle will afford opportunity for the exercise of their callings, to plunder, to rob and to murder. Such men are ready to *practice*, and by example, instruct others to practice the doctrine, which the mouth pieces of such meetings *recommend*. They labour for the equalization of property; and like the vultures who hover over contending armies in the hope of a gluttonous feast on the fallen carcases, they look forward to the glorious time of anarchy, which they anticipate as the reward their present patient attendance on the labour of excitement. Mixed in the crowd, they second the views of the designing men, who, under the plausible pretence of helping the poor and the ignorant to their rights, make them pay for their own undoing. That the poison thus poured into the minds of the unthinking has begun to operate is too evident, whenever a decently dressed person, walking out, finds himself in the vicinity of the lower orders of society. The remarks addressed *at*, if not *to* him — as to the sources of his prosperity - that it was the result of the labour of the poor—that all would come round again soon— that it will be their turn next! &c &c. prove the operation of the deleterious principles which have been poured into the ears of the working classes of society. A Reform in Parliament is but a cry at the present time, used by many to hide the deep design of general devastation. To ignorance, to idleness, and improvidence, the doctrine of the Spenceans, by whatever name it is called, has great charms. No wonder it has many votaries. Men acting under such influence  are easily persuaded that the richer part of society are enjoying the fruits of the labour of the poor; that their rulers are their oppressors; and that the wholesome laws of restriction which Parliament, with paternal care, has enacted are acts of tyranny. Can it then be wondered at, that designing men should find tools to work with?

By the placard which we have quoted, it will be seen that a preparatory meeting, for levying pecuniary means to carry the resolution of last Monday into execution was held on Saturday evening at New Islington, Salford and we understand that other preparatory meetings were held yesterday morning, very early, at Middleton, Oldham &c. to instruct men (so systematic are the proceedings of organized disaffection) as to their conduct at the Manchester meeting, on their proposed march to London, and their junction with their brother reformers in Spa-fields.

A crowd began to gather on the ground in front of the Quaker's Meeting-house, before nine o'clock yesterday morning, and a table, elevated on a cart, was used by a person to write a register of the names of the poor, infatuated wretches who declared their intention to proceed to London, and to receive money, subscribed by the less zealous, or more infirm votaries of delusion, in aid of the volunteers. At half-past nine the number of persons on the ground amounted to at least ten thousand `[One of the Manchester papers says from 25 to 30,000 ]`, soon after which, a leader of the multitude (whose name we could not learn) came to the field in a hackney-coach out of which he stepped and mounted the cart. He was received with huzzas; but we were pleased to observe, that, the cheers did not proceed from the bulk of the assembly, and only from a few of the more insane (not amounting to more than three or four hundred at the most) who held up and waved their hats.

The greatest praise is due to the care and foresight of the Magistrates and the Boroughreeves and Constables of Manchester and Salford for the precautionary steps they took. A great number of additional constables had been sworn in, and soon after ten o'clock they proceeded to the neighbourhood of the meeting, from whence about a thousand men, provided with blankets and such provision as they could make, had withdrawn a short time before, to Piccadilly, from whence they set out, soon after on the mad scheme of marching to London. A little before eleven o'clock, whilst the Orators were displaying their eloquence in the brick-field, using the most inflammatory language on the one hand, and the greatest persuasion on, the other, to induce the silly people who surrounded the cart to contribute bountifully towards defraying the expenses of the blanketeers during their expedition, the preparation of the legal authorities was complete, and the Magistrates, the Municipal Officers, and the Special Constables, and four troops of cavalry from the barracks, (under the direction of Sir John Byng, the Commander of the District) simultaneously, by a most happy execution of the prepared design, surrounded the seditious hustings, and took all the orators and their papers into custody. Amongst the former was a man of the name of Drummond, provided with a new great coat &c. to head the column of petitioners who had just before left the ground, and another leader of the name of Baguley. The sweep was instantaneously compleated and the exciters to mischief were immediately marched away, prisoners, under a strong escort, to the New Bailey Prison. Whilst the crowd gave way to apprehensions for personal safety, and dispersed, a detachment of the peace officers, under the direction of *Magistrates who accompanied them*, immediately after the ringleaders were secured, led a troop of cavalry after the migratory reformers, who had set out on their way to London, in the expectation of being overtaken very soon by their leaders, bringing with them the money which infatuation had subscribed (we understand to a considerable amount) on the field. The stragglers were overtaken, and many were secured before they had arrived at Longsight; but at Stockport Bridge, the cavalry surrounded a great number, all furnished for bivouacing— and some, if the knives found in their knapsacks indicated any thing, for other purposes, who were made prisoners. Upwards of two hundred were brought to New Bailey Prison in the afternoon.

Before we close the account of the proceedings of the day, it is a duty to state, that a detachment of the 54th regiment of foot was under arms, in the vicinity of the meeting, but were not called upon to act; and that the Cheshire Yeomanry Cavalry were under arms all day in various parts of that county and a detachment of several troops, evinced their zeal, and entitled them to the thanks of their country, by their services in Manchester, where they volunteered their assistance; many of them having marched at least thirty miles yesterday for that purpose.

In the course of the day, a part of the 55th regiment of foot marched into town, but we are happy to state that there is no appearance of there being any necessity for any thing more than the impression of their presence. In the course of the evening, Johnstone, Ogden, Baguley and Drummond, who were, we understand, arrested by virtue of warrants from the Secretary of State's Office, were, we believe, sent off under a proper guard to London. The town is now at peace and free from alarm.

*Exchange Herald.*
```

The account in the *Manchester Mercury* was slightly less antagonistic to the protesters in its report of the events.

```{admonition} Appearing on a temporary stage, March 1817
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000239/18170311/021/0004
Manchester Mercury - Tuesday 11 March 1817

The Manchester Mercury, Tuesday, March 11, 1817.

The lenient moderation of the magistracy has at length eked out the fullest extent of forbearance compatible with the protection which is due to the persons and property of the peaceable and well-disposed part of the community. We find it was among the notifications at the meeting on the 3d inst. near St. Peter's Church, corroborated, in the course of last week, by the declarations individuals who have been actively engaged in promoting the late seditious meetings, that the espousers of their doctrines should collect at the same place the Monday following (yesterday), and proceed to the Metropolis, at nine o'clock, to present a petition to the Prince Regent, that they might be enabled *"to undeceive him!"* Aware of these intentions, and of the dangers which an immense influx of strangers, irritated by the inflammatory appeals of their factious leaders, (who, under the pretence of promoting Parliamentary Reform, have been for a length of time agitating the minds of the labouring class of society), portended, the conservators of the public tranquillity took every precaution adequate to the occasion.

Yesterday morning, according to the expectations entertained, crowds of people flocked into town from all directions, as early as eight o'clock, and at about nine, the instigators appeared on their temporary stage in cart, and continued to harangue the multitude till their vast increasing numbers suggested the expediency of putting into practice the well-formed arrangements of the civil and military powers. Accordingly, a party of the first Regiment of Dragoons, under Colonel Teesdale, accompanied by the Magistrates of the District, appeared amongst them, and with adroitness and decision almost electrical, surrounded the erection, and immediately conveyed the entire group upon it to the New Bayley Prison; their attention was next directed to the concourse of auditors, who were forthwith dispersed, without the infliction of any severity.

An arrest had taken place early on Sunday morning, of Johnson and Ogden, who had previously figured at this place, and they were secured in the New Bayley. Others were seized by the soldiers on their way to deliver their charge in Salford. The following are the names of prisoners: Drummond, Baguley, (the two orators), Handring, Grimshaw, Lingard, Quiney, Shaw, Wood, Hargraves, Lever, Shawcross, two Williamses, Tucker, Whitworth, Oddey, Bousfield, Kay, Lefgar, Blackshaw, Simms, Thomason, Barlow, Cuthbird, Lees, Hudson, and Higginbotham, (the owner of the cart on which the stage was fixed).

A considerable number of people set out on their mission to London, taking the route of Stockport, but about forty of them were reconducted to Manchester, and added to their other unfortunate companions; others were furnished secure accommodations in Stockport. Most of them were provided with knapsacks, &c. containing blankets and other articles. Upon the examination of some of these travelling equipages, two unusually large knives were discovered.

Johnston, Ogden, &c. will be dispatched, without loss of time, under escort, to the Secretary of State, in London.

We shall desist from entering further at present into the cases of there characters, as they will probably hereafter be the subject High Judicial Enquiry.

The military preparations were under the direction of Sir John Byng, the commander of the district, who arrived in Manchester on Sunday. A party of the Regiment of Foot were present to render their assistance.

We may fairly presume that at one period there was an assemblage of at least thirty thousand at the meeting; and believe we not over-rate the arrivals in the course of the day at from sixty to seventy thousand individuals.

No particular act of outrage or intemperance has yet reached our ears, and we cannot help feeling highly indebted to the judicious and salutary interposition of the respective authorities for the satisfactory result of this day's transactions. As we are closing this account, we have authority to state, that the apprehensions are nothing short of *two hundred* persons.
```

The same article was also reprinted in the *Chester Chronicle* of Friday, 14th March, 1817, [p3](https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000342/18170314/008/0003), with the additional closing paragraph, which could almost be read as a premonition of the Peterloo massacre of a couple of years later: *We have heard, and it is with grief we notice it, that several of the misguided people were severely hurt by the cavalry.—The mob, we understand, made a very ludicrous appearance; many of them having their bed blankets thrown over their shoulders and fastened in front over the breast with a skewer.—They were in full marching order, those who could not procure knapsacks or haversacks, having large bundles attached their shoulders.*

The *London Chronicle* included the *Exchange Herald* and *Manchester Mercury* reports in its reporting, also providing additional context from the *Glasgow Herald*:

```{admonition} Crowds of people flocked into town, March 1817
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002634/18170314/025/0003
London Chronicle - Friday 14 March 1817

March 13  
EXTRAORDINARY AND ALARMING MEETINGS AT MANCHESTER.

[FROM THE EXCHANGE HERALD.] ...

[FROM THE MANCHESTER MERCURY OF TUESDAY.] ...

...

Speaking on the passing of the Habeas Corpus Suspension Bill, the Editor of *The Glasgow Courier* adds—"The Habeas Corpus Act does not extend to Scotland; but the present Bill contains a clause suspending, until 1st of July next, part of the Scots Act of 1701, for preventing wrongous imprisonments and undue delays in trials, by which those accused of crimes had a power to *Rurn their Letters*, so that any person imprisoned under suspicion of high treason, or treasonable practices, cannot be liberated, tried, or admitted to bail, without an Order signed by six of his Majesty's Privy Council." On the statement made by the LORD ADVOCATE in the House or Commons, the same writer says, that he hopes "a short time will develop whole of this highly, dangerous conspiracy, and check its baneful procedure, however widely it may have extended its influence."
```

A copy of the petition carried by the Blanketeers was published in the *Manchester Mercury* a couple of weeks later.

```{admonition} The Blanketeers' petition, April 1817
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000239/18170401/022/0003

Manchester Mercury - Tuesday 01 April 1817

The Blanketeers' Petition.

The following is a copy of the Petition which Malcontents were to carry forward to the Prince Regent, from the press of the State Prisoner Odden:—

THE PETITION OF THE UNDERSIGNED, INHABITANTS MANCHESTER,IN THE COUNTY OF LANCASTER,

*Humbly Sheweth,*

"That your Petitioners, before the last war, neither felt nor feared either difficulties or privations; but during the continuance have frequently experienced both, and have repeatedly applied to your Royal Father, your Royal Highness, and the House of Commons, for redress, which applications, we are sorry to say, have in our humble, but firm, belief, not received that attention which their importance merited; so that now, when the waste of war is over, our sufferings are become both more general and deeper than ever.

"This state of things, we, your Petitioners, attribute to the rapid increase of taxation, which has been quadrupled, together with the increase of rent, which has probably, been doubled during the war; which, together so nearly absorb the whole produce of the kingdom, as to leave a quantity very far short of being sufficient to keep your Petitioners in existence, and therefore their lives are now become a burden and a plague to them; your distressed Petitioners are further convinced, that if the House of Commons had really emanated from, and been wholly and annually appointed by, the People at large, this war, and the taxation resulting therefrom, would long ago have received a sufficient check, even admitting the nation have sanctioned its commencement— that the laws to regulate the importation of corn, calculated to advance its price, would never have been suffered to pass—that the law of libel, which subjects the publishers of truth in some instances to great pains and penalties, thereby preventing the publication of the most important truths, could never have received the sanction of the friends of truth and mankind— that a Bill to suspend the Habeas Corpus Act, a Bill empowering Ministers to imprison, without proof of guilt, whomsoever they please, and for an unknown length time—could never have passed.

"Your Petitioners therefore humbly, but fervently, pray, that your Highness will instantly dismiss from your Councils all those Ministers who have advised or devised such cruel, such unjust measures, and call to your Councils even who are the declared or avowed friends to conciliatory measures—to Parliamentary Reform— and a general and very considerable retrenchment in every part of national expenditure. Our lives are in your hands—our happiness, in great measure, depends on you. If you procure the adoption of measures calculated to relieve us, you may then safely rely upon our support and gratitude— WITHOUT THIS, WE CAN NEITHER SUPPORT YOU NOR OURSELVES. Your gracious attention to our prayers will gain you eternal esteem and gratitude of your Petitioners, who will ever pray."
```

Following the start of the Blanketeers' march, several of the arrested marchers were remanded to the Castle of Chester, while others were sent to Manchester's New Bailey.

```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000389/18170318/007/0003
Chester Courant - Tuesday 18 March 1817

RIOTOUS PROCEEDINGS AT MANCHESTER.

We cannot find language to express our surprise at the infatuation which the following details exhibit. In a future age it will not believed that in the 19th century, people at large and out of Bedlam, could for a moment have conceived so mad a project. It has never been equalled modern times, but cases of superstitious phrenzy, —by Buchanites, Brotherites, Southcottians, and other projectors of journies to the *Land of Canaan!*

A meeting was held at Manchester, on Monday week, previous to which it was intimated, that the numbers collected on that day would proceed to London to present a Petition to the Prince Regent person, for the purpose of *"undeceiving him."* Placards were stuck up, and a handbill distributed, of which the following is a copy:—

"PUBLIC MEETING.

"The Inhabitants of Manchester and its vicinity are respectfully informed, that a PUBLIC MEETING, according to adjournment, will be held near St. Peter's Church, on Monday morning, the 1Oth of March, 1817, when it is hoped that every person who is determined to carry his Petition to London, will assemble peaceably and orderly, and provide himself with the necessary means of support requisite to bear him through this loyal and necessary undertaking.

"It is hoped those friends of Parliamentary Reform, who possess the means, will come forward on this important occasion.

"Persons will be appointed to receive contributions this evening at New Islington, and at the Meeting on Monday.  
(Signed) W. OGDEN, Printer, 26, Wood-street."

The people of Stockport were invited to join those of Manchester, on Lancashire Hill. Several Emissaries were at work during the week, making every effort to inflame the public and to engage a large mass to assemble on the day appointed. It was insinuated that 25,000 stand of arms at Birmingham might be secured. Information of these proceedings was sent to the Secretary of State's Office, and reached London on Friday night week. Immediate measures were adopted: a Magistrate and King's Messenger were dispatched with warrants, and Qgden, the Printer, and *Orator* Johnstone, (the same who went to Lancashire to instruct the workers in the potteries in the Rights of Man) with two others, were apprehended on Sunday and put into safe custody.

On Sunday, the public agitation arising from these rumours was encreased by the arrival of express after express in several of the towns of this county, summoning the Volunteer Force to the vicinity of Manchester for the assistance of the Civil power, in case the mal-contents should be disposed to put in exercise their avowed design; and by an early hour on Monday, a considerable body of regular troops, Cavalry and Infantry, were on duty in that town, while the Cheshire Yeomanry Cavalry, under the command of Lieut. Col. Townshend, were posted—five tro6ps of them on the left bank of the Mersey towards Cheadle and Stretford, two troops in Stockport, and one in Macclesfield—to act as circumstances should require.

On Monday, about nine in the morning, a crowd began to assemble in front of the Quaker's Meeting-House, Manchester. A table, elevated on a cart, was provided for the Secretary and Treasurer to enrol the names of the volunleers for the pilgrimage, and enter the monies received for their support on the journey. By half-past nine the number of persons assembled Was about 10,000. One of the leaders now reached the ground in a hackney-coach, and was saluted with huzzas by some of the populace. The speakers now began their seditious and inflammatory harangues in a strain of uuusual violence.—Major-General Byng, the Commander of the North West District was on the ground from the commencement, a little aloof from the assembly, and had disposed a party of the First Dragoon Guards so judiciously on their flanks, that on a signal given by him, when the numbers had now accumulated to about twenty thousand, and the instigators fancied themselves in perfect security, that force of Cavalry by a sudden combined movement surrounded the stage, and secured every individual upon it. The prisoners were presently lodged in the New Bayley Gaol, during the progress of the soldiers to which place the number of arrests had arisen to seven and twenty, and the multitude, dispirited bv the loss of their leaders were dispersed with little resistance and without any serious accident. It is reported that at least one thousand of the well-disposed Inhabitants of Manchester, having enrolled themselves as Special Constables, were aiding and assisting on this occasion, a circumstance which does honour to that town and justifies the Loyal Declaration which it was the first to publish.

The following are in the number of those arrested in Manchester:—

Drummond, Baguley, (the two orators) Harding, Grimshaw, Lingard, Quiney, Shaw, Wood, Hargraves, Lever, Shawcross, two Williamses, Tucker, Whitwortb, Oddey, Bousfield, Key, Legfar, Blackshaw, Simms, Thomason, Barlow, Cuthbird, Lees, Hudson, and Higginbottom (the owner of the cart on which the stage was fixed).

Still a considerable body of the Petitioners abated nothing of their resolution to proceed to the Metropolis: they took the way for Stockport in straggling parties, and by ten o'clock in the forenoon, several thousand men had proceeded far on their advance thither. There, however, was to be encountered an impediment which they did pot anticipate,—the two troops of Volunteer Cavalry before mentioned, with the Magistrates and Constables of the vicinity; who occupied the Bridge over the Mersey by which that town is approached from Manchester, and who, according to the directions received, having read the Riot Act, proceeded to take into Custody, and to commit to prison, all such of the travellers as had blankets or knapsacks in their possession. Nor was this the only inconvenience to which our unfortunate adventurers were subjected, a troop of the First Dragoons, dispatched from Manchester, were harrassing their rear at the same moment. Thus exposed to a double assault, they endeavoured to escape laterally, when a considerable number succeeded in evading the vigilance of the Military, and abandoning the knapsacks which they had, crossed the river at Brinksway Bridge, about a mile below the scene of the action. In this stage of the proceedings one hundred and eighty-seven prisoners were taken; naniely, an advanced guard of 24 persons taken at some djstance from Stockport by Mr. Lloyd and the regular Police, and 163 by the same Police, assisted by the troops and constables stationed at the Bridge,—of whom the former number are already examined, and 21 committed to our Castle, on a charge of seditious and treasonable practices; the latter number were re-conducted to Manchester from whence they came, and lodged with their associates in the New Bayley Prison.

Of the twenty thousand assembled in the morning, the residue of about a thousand remained on the road for London; they were enumerated to near that amount by a person stationed at Poynton, who had his commission from Macclesfield for that purpose. In the meantime, curiosity attracted the great population of that town and its vicinity into the principal streets of the place, the remaining Troop of Cavalry was under arms, and express after express arrived, giving information of fhe movements of the malcontents, of their passage through Stockport, their considerable force, their close approach, until about four o'clock, when the public expectation was at the highest point of suspense and anxiety,—the unhappy objects began to traverse the Market Place by twenties and thirties, and fifties at a time. The tattered habiliments and forlorn aspect of the many deluded, with the desperate looks and language of the few villains who deceived them, might well remind one of the march of the Marseilles; and some there were that had augured a similar event of their expedition. But their feebleness and discomfiture were now evident to every eye, to admit the prevalence of any other feeling than that of compassion.

The Petitioners entering Macclesfield by different Routes, their number would not have been ascertained but for the precautions taken at Poynton. Very few quitted the town on the evening of their arrival; perhaps on the whole two hundred may have pcoceeded Southward. That the majority returned to their homes pcaceably, may be attributed with just reason to the moderate conduct and persuasion of the police and the people. Of the people, only five persons were found so far tainted with disaffection to be induced to accompany the remnant that went forward: the police, taking no arbitrary measures, because no necessity existed for them, merely adopted such precautions as would ensure the public peace. The Inns and Lodging Houses were visited by the special Constables, who patrolled all night for the purpose, and the Cavalry kept the streets clear of disturbance. Timely intelligence was forwarded to Leek of the movement of the Reformers in that direction; which was again communicated by express to the Magistrates of Ashborne and Derby.

Accordingly, on Tuesday, the Leek and troops of Yeomanry Cavalry were mustered, and took their stations, the former at Okeover, the latter at Hanging Bridge, on the way between the two towns; their object being, under the direction of the Magistracy, to prevent the further progress of the Petitioners. Such as persevered at Okeover were prevented at Hanging Bridge, and such as swam or waded the Dove at the latter place, were taken into custody before they could penetrate so far as Derby, where as a security against every event, four troops of volunteer cavalry were on duty all Wednesday night.

Independent of parties of the 54th and 85th regiments of foot, and the first regiment of dragoons, eight troops of the Cheshire Yeomanry (the Tabley, Knutstord, Northwich, Mere, Ashton Hayes, &c. &c.) under the command of Lieut. Col. Townshend, were in readiness. The Tabley and Knutsford troops were marched on Sunday evening to Altringham, and the Northwich to Knutsford the same evening. From the excellent plans adopted by the Magistracy their services were not required. In the afternoon they were marched into Manchester, and received the thanks of the General and the Magistrates for the activity and zeal whidh they had displayed. The gallant General passed a high eulogium on their discipline and soldierlike appearance, and stated that he should feel it his duty to report their conduct to Viscount Sidmonth. The five troops mustered about 300 strong; and, upon this occasion, fully supported the high character which this fine regiment has obtained by its useful and meritorous services upon many former occasions. Few Yeomanry corps have been more frequently employed or acquitted themselves with such distinguished honour.

Copy of a Letter from Colonel Sir J. Leicester, Commanding His Royal Highness the Prince Regent's Regiment of Cheshire Yeomanry, to Lieutenant Colonel Townshend :—

"*March* 13, 1817.

"Colonel Sir John Leicester takes the earliest opportunity of making known to Lieut. Col. Townshend the very great satisfaction be has received, from his account of the admirable conduct of the regiment, when called upon Service on Monday last. He is still more gratified in being able to transmit the following Testimonies of the high estimation in which Government hold their Services, by enclosing the Copy of a Letter which he has had the honor to receive from his Majesty's Secretary of State, Lord Sidmouth, and which he requests may be communicated in Orders, with as little delay as possible, to every Member of the Regiment.

"Sir J. Leicester cannot conclude without expressing his regret, that, from the suddenness of the emergency, his own joining the Regiment was rendered impossible; and at the same time conveying his Thanks to Lieut.-Col. Townshend for his great zeal and judicious arrangement of the Troops; as well as to every Officer and Private, for their very meritorious exertions on this occasion.

Copy of a Letter from Lord Sidmouth to. Sir J. F. Leicester, Bart.

"Sir, "*Whitehall, 12 March*,-1817.

I beg you to accept my thanks for the very satisfactory communication with which you have favoured me; and to be assured that the conduct on Monday last, of the Regiment of Yeomanry Cavalry, which is under your Command, was such as to afford to the Officers and Privates of whom it consists, the strongest claim to the approbation of His Majesty's Government. It is highly gratifying to me to add that the sentiments expressed by Major-General Sir John Byng, as well as by all the Civil Authorities of Manchester, are honourable in the utmost degree to the Services and Character of that public-spirited and truly-respectable Corps.

"I have the honor to be, Sir,  
"Your most obedient and faithful Servant,  
"SIDMOUTH.  
"To Sir John F. Leicester, Bart."
 
On Thursday last, TWENTY-ONE of the misguided characters who had distinguished themselves in the late seditious meetings at Manchester, arrived in this city, escorted by a detachment of that intrepid body of men, the Earl of Chester's Cavalry. The coach, in which they were conveyed from Heaton Norris, where they were apprehended, was, as soon as it entered the city, followed to the Castle Yard, by an immense number of people, all apparently eager to obtain a glimpse of the prisoners. In the commitment they are charged with treasonable and seditious practices; but they are not, we understand, as yet, finally committed for trial. The following are the names of those who are at present in the custody the constable of the Castle:—

Benjamin Mellor | Arthur Irwin  
George Pickup | Richard Jones  
William Wilcock | Robert Evans  
William Neal | Matthew Exlet  
John Shaw | William Goddard  
William Marsh | Samuel Whitmore  
William Smith | James Callighan  
John Garlick | Benjamin Broadbent  
John Senior | Henry Holding  
James Beswick | George Hyde. 
William Pimlot |

A great proportion of the prisoners, we lament to state, are cotton spinners, many of whom are known to earn between *thirty* and *forty shillings per week!* — So much for vaunted distredb and misery.

We cannot close the details of these incendiary proceedings, without congratulating the well-disposed part of this and the adjoining counties, on the firmness and magnanimity, the zeal and precaution displayed by the Magistracy, and the Military, during the above attempts to create insubordination and civil confusion. Had not vigilance been used,—had not promptitude and decision been evinced by the protecting powers, we are fearful, that at this time, scenes would have been exhibited in Manchester, not only destructive of the peace,, but the PROPERTY of its leading inhabitants. It is not very easy to stop the fell sweep of a mob, when it is actuated by the most violent fury and implacable feeling: the only time to overthrow its purposes is, when its strength is scarcely compacted,— when its objects, are in such a state of forwardness, as to require nothing to heighten their malignity, but execution. At such a time, the utmost vigilance, and we will say, the most severe and coercive measures, are indispensably necessary; the Magistrates, &c. in the above town and its vicinity, were happily aware of this.—If the aggressor or his advocate, feel aggrieved at the enforcement of such measures, let him remember, thathis own deeds have creatcd them. So serious a commotion as the above, is a convinciag proof, that the extraordinary powers, conferred, for a limited time, upon the Executive Government, have not been, granted at an improper and undue season. It is high time to call in the aid of legislative restrictions, (in spite of the bitter acumen of the furious demagogue, and the contemptible sneer of the moderate reformer), when disaffection and riot assume so imposing an attitude : and it is the imperative duty of every friend of moderation, of order, and our Constitution, to stand boldly forth, in defence of our laws and high authorities, and protect both from the rude and uncalled for designs of those political enthusiasts, who, to say the best of them, with no one object in view, of attainable and practical utility, are wholly engrossed with a vain ambition, a false patriotism, or in seducing a multitude of unlettered people from a state of quietude, to that of infamous disturbance and disorder.
```

```{admonition} A very ludicrous appearance, March 1817
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000365/18170322/009/0003
Carlisle Patriot - Saturday 22 March 1817

MANCHESTER, MARCH 18.

A number of the designing or deluded persons about Manchester have been apprehended and conveyed to the Castle of Chester, in addition to those mentioned apprehended last week and committed to the New Bailey, Manchester. They were apprehended at Heaton Norris, and are charged in the commitment with treasonable and seditious practices. They appeared to be a wretched set of individuals, and two of them mere youths. The Chester papers state that Pike-heads, and numbers of heavy sticks, containing a kind of daggers, about eight inches long, have been found at Stockport. Several of the deluded men were cut in the face in opposing the cavalry. The Blanketeers are represented to have made a very ludicrous appearance; many them having their bed blankets thrown over their shoulders, and fastened in front, over the breast, with a skewer. They were in full marching order; those who could not procure knapsacks or haversacks, had large bundles attached to their shoulders en militaire. Many of them swam several rivers to elude the civil and military power waiting at bridges to intercept them.

A Manchester paper of Tuesday says, "the number of unfortunate objects confined in our prison exceeded 250, of whom 120 have been examined by W.D. Evans Esq. and of whom 40 have been discharged, and 80 committed for want of securities."

It is a well known fact, that *Evening Meetings* have been held for a long time past, at least twice a week, to which persons have been admitted indiscriminately, in a large old Spinning Factory, at New Islington, Ancoats. A room in it, capable of holding thousands of persons, with a rostrum in the centre, has been frequently filled. During the last week these assemblies have been held every night, to engage the deluded in this wild but dangerous enterprise of marching to London with petitions, and to collect contributions for the purpose. Leaders of tens, fifties, &c. were appointed, and every tenth man was to be the bearer of a petition.

These petitions, it appears, were not only of one import, but (numerous they were, one to every ten Political Pilgrims) were *exactly the same*, being copied from a prepared form, printed for the purpose by Ogden. Many of these petitions, fairly engrossed, (but many instances only signed by one person, and in several *without a single signature*,) were found in the hands of the leaders of the march.

From the *Macclesfield Courier* we learn, that that town and neighbourhood, were thrown into a state of great alarm so early as Saturday the 8th inst. by the prevalent report that "10,000 Scotsmen, clothed in plaid," had entered Manchester, with the certainty of being joined about 40,000 Lancashire men.

On Wednesday, another arrest took place, by virtue of a warrant sent down from the Secretary of State's Office, when Elijah Dixon, a cotton spinner, was taken at work, in Manchester, where he was in the habit of earning considerable weekly wages. He was sent off to London the same evening, under the conduct of a Police Officer; and on Friday delivered up to the custody of the keeper of one of the London Bridewells, previous to his examination.

"Combination has led to Conspiracy, Conspiracy to Treason against the State; and had it not been for the wise, forbearing vigilance of our Magistrates, seconded by the active care of our Police, scenes of misery might have occurred in this populous district and elsewhere, which cannot be imagined but with horror. It is a circumstance not altogether conjectural, that at given points on their approach to the capital, arms and ammunition were expected to be prepared for them.— The facility too with which contributions have been levied and obtained for these unworthy purposes is truly astonishing, if the nature of the times and the cry of misery which has been prevalent be taken into consideration." —*Manch. Chron.*

This affair shows the wisdom and necessity of the late proceedings in parliament, by which government has been armed with extraordinary powers to counteract the designs of faction. If any before doubted whether a case sufficiently strong had been made out, it can scarcely be doubted now. If the organization of the disaffected societies was so complete, and the delusion spread through the disaffected classes so extensive, that, at the appointment of a few desperate characters, a mob of 50 or 60,000 persons could be drawn together to one place, at a given time, and the greater part so devoted to their instigators, as to be ready to engage in any project, however mischievous and insane, which they might direct, as, for instance, to march in a body to London, to throw the country into disorder throughout their march, and to live on free quarters on the inhabitants, (the only means they had of subsistence,) then was it high time for the country to call for additional protection, and for parliament to grant it. What can those delectabie politicians in the abstract, who have clamoured against a standing army in time of peace, say? Was the civil power equal to such an emergence? If, when regular troops, and others of the military are at hand, such bold attempts are made at disorder, what must have been our condition had the army been disbanded, and that arm of our defence cut off by the knife of retrenchment? The folly of those who are ever declaiming on abstract rights and ?? [desires?], without any regard to what is fit and practicable, is sufficiently evident; and it is pitiable, and marks the infirmity of many acute minds; but there is a numerous class, who know what they mean when they reiterate the arguments and declamations of persons, who, though they do much mischief, do not, in truth, design it. The straight forward men clamour against taxation, because they wish to get rid of the army, and they wish the army disbanded, because it is an inconvenient obstruction to the operation of reforming mobs. They have the same objection to the civil power being strengthened; they have bawled with all their breath against the swearing in of special constables, and have held the measure up, in the words of a notable oracle of the faction, as "a conspiracy against the liberties and rights of the people;" and why? They wish to mob without control, and to revolutionize without check.—*Liverpool Courier.*
```

```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000950/18170325/028/0004
Cumberland Pacquet and Ware's Whitehaven Advertiser - Tuesday 25 March 1817

MANCHESTER.

By the papers from Manchester and Macclesfield, we are happy to find that every thing remains quiet, and that of the deluded-persons who had set out to proceed to London, few, if any, have prosecuted their journey further than Leek and Ashbourne. The larger part have been prevailed upon to return "repentant to their homes."

*Manchester, March 15.*

A small body of the deluded men who had eluded the best attentions of the guardian of the peace, proceeded on their errand; but at Leek and Ashbourne fresh discomfiture waited them, and between twenty and thirty were taken into custody, and have since been brought forward under the care of the Staffordshire Yeomanry Cavalry. At four o'clock on Wednesday, though considerable anxiety had been manifested, none of the misguided folks had made their appearance at Derby; we hope, therefore, they have been induced to relinquish altogether their imprudent and fruitless expedition, and return quietly to their homes.

One of these, John Berwick, servant to Mr. John Shawcross, of Gorton, is one of the inmates in Chester Castle, upon the *simple* imputation of stealing his master’s blanket.

Another is a master shoemaker in the neighbourhood of this town, and a man of some property: but deaf to the entreaties of his wife, he sallied out with his blanket. Thanks to the celerity of a pair of spring heels, he escaped the fangs of the officers of justice.

The oreanization of this scheme seems to have been so far matured, as that every tenth man was the superintendent of his nine comrades, who was their treasurer, and bearer of the petitioning scroll. Many have returned panic-struck to their homes, unable or loath to give a satisfactory account of the funds confided to them.

Elijah Dixon, a cotton spinner, was also dispatched on Tuesday night by the London mail, in safe charge of another King's Messenger.

The number of unfortunate objects confined in our prisons, implicated in these rash transactions, is upwards of 250. None of the captured-delinquents have been discharged at the date of our latest accounts.

In justice to a worthy, patient, and most suffering part of the community, as an undoubted fact, it affords us the sincerest pleasure to remark, inasmuch as the weavers are asserted to have formed a prominent part of this body, that several manufacturers who employed a number of looms in this neighbourhood sent to ascertain how many would be deserted, when it was found that not more than about six looms were idle, althoug several hundreds were visited. A great proportion of the prisoners, we lament to state, are cotton spinners, many of whom are known to earn between *thirty* and *forty shillings per week!*—So much for vaunted distress and misery.

*Macclesfield, March 15.*

The petitioners entering Macclesfied by different routes, their number would not have been ascertained but for the precautions taken at Poynton. Very few quitied the town on the evening of their arrival; perhaps on the whole two hundred may have proceeded southward. That the majority returned to their homes peaceably may be attributed with just reason to the moderate conduct and persuasion of the police and the people. Of the people, only five persons (at this moment prisoners in the town) were found so far tainted with disaffection as to be induced to accompany the remnant that went forward: the police taking no arbitrary measures, because no necessity existed for them, merely adopted such precantions as would ensure the public peace.

The inns and lodging houses were visisted by the special constables, who patrolled all night for the purpose, and the cavalry kept the streets clear of disturbance. Timely intelligence was forwarded to Leek, of the movement of the Reformers in that direction: which was again communicated by express to the Magistrates at Ashbourne and Derby.

Accordingly on Tuesday the Leek and Ashbourne troops of Yeomanry Cavalry, were mustered, and took their stations, the former at Okeover, the latter at Hanging Bridge, on the way between the two towns; their object being, under the direction of the Magistracy, to prevent the firther progress of the petition. Such as persevered Okeover were prevented at Hanging Bridge; and such as swam or waded the Dove at the latter place were taken into custody before they could penetrate[?] so far as Derby where as a security against any[?] event, four troops of volunteer soldiers[?] were on duty all Wednesday night. as four o'clock in the morning of Thursday last, not an individual had arrived in the last-mentioned town, which it is evident they must have done in two days after leaving Macclesfield, if not arrested and detained on the route, as we are assured from Ashbourne that they have been.
```


```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002408/18170320/019/0003
Morning Herald (London) - Thursday 20 March 1817

A private letter from Leek gives the following account of the entrance into that town and neighbourhood of the deluded persons who had set out on their Quixotic expedition to London, for the purpose of petitioning the Prince Regent:— "Instead of not twenty of those deluded individuals having proceeded into Staffordshire (as the Macclesfield Editor asserted), the inhabitants of the town of Leek were on Tuesday last thrown into a temporary agitation, by the arrival,in two divisions, Oof upwards of 400 of them (without any previous notice whatever) until the presence of the Rev. Edward Powys, a neighbouring Magistrate, could be procured, to sanction the measures proposed by the inhabitants of the town of Leek, of arresting the further progress of those itinerant petitioners who peaceably, and without being suffered to halt in the town, proceeded onwards towards Ashbourne, with the exception of three of them, who,appearing to be the ringleaders, were seized and detained by the constables. Between two and three hours had elapsed before Mr. Powys could arrive at Leek, and no sooner did he arrive than with the greatest promptitude, accompneied by the High Constable of the Hundred, the Constable and Churchwarden of Leek, and by several of the respectable inbabitants of the town, and the Leek Troop of the Staffordshire Yeomanry Cavalry uder the command of Lieut. Coupland, he pursued those much to be pitied and deluded men towards Ashborne, and was fortunate enough to come up with them before they reached Hanging-bridge, which crosses the river Dove, abbout a mile short of Ashborne, where a stand was made, and with the prompt and timely assistance of Mr. Arkwright, Mr. Webster,and Dr. Greaves, three Magistrates residing in and near Ashborne, aided also by a party of the Derbyshire Yeomanry Cavalry and some Gentlemem in that neighbourhood, and the measures which were then and there agreed upon, of guarding all the bridges in the vicinity, not fifty of the whole number who left Leek, ever reached Ashborne.— The whole of Wednesday, Mr. Powys was engaged in Leek, in swearing in Special Constables; to thecredit of the town, upwards of 400 inhabitants took the oath of allegiance, and were sworn in as Specia lConstables for six months. The bridges and other passes also in the neighbourhood of the town, were guarded; a great number of the misguided personswho were coming towards Leek, were driven back again, and others, who were loitering about the town,were apprehended and detained until the following morning, when, with the party which had beenescorted from the neighbourhood of Ashhorne, 33 in number and 6 since, they were forwarded under a guard to Macclesfield, on their way to their respective homes. It will be pleasing to know, that those men appeared sensible of their error, and of their having been misled and made the dupes of artful and designing men; and much pains were taken by the inhabitants of Leek to instil into their minds the impropriety, and danger to themselves, of their conduct.
```

Meanwhile, another of the Bills previously introduced, the *Seditious Meetings Bill*, continued its progress through Parliament.

```{admonition} Seditious Meeting Bill, March 1817
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000540/18170329/008/0003
The Scotsman - Saturday 29 March 1817

SEDITIOUS MEETING BILL

...

*Friday March 21.*

...

SEDITIOUS MEETINGS BILL.

Lord Viscount SIDMOUTH moved the Order of the Day, which having been read, the House resolved itself into a Committee on the Seditious Meetings Bill.

Lord GRENVILLE objected to certain clauses as not sufficiently clear in the wording.

Lord HOLLAND thought the penalty of death was by far too severe to be inflicted in the circumstances described in the Bill.

Lord St JOHN objected to the power being lodged in one magistrate, when two were required to remove a pauper, and the whole magistracy of a county could not in other cases subject an individual to the punishment of death.

After some further discussion, it was agreed to leave out the words "in such a case" to prevent any ambiguity with regard to the legality of meetings. But Lord St John's amendment to vest the power of dispersing a meeting in two justices instead of one, and Lord Holland's amendment to leave out the words making the penalty death, were negatived.

Lord ERSKINE objected to that part of the Bill which gave one Justice of Peace the power of deciding whether a notice tended to stir up the people to hatred or contempt of the government. This would give a power to a single Justice of Peace, which since the libel act had been denied to the Judges of the land. Another clause gave one Justice a power to decide as to the tendency of words spoken at meetings lawfully assembled. This he thought extremely dangerous, He thought clauses of this nature would tend to increase the characteristic delusion of the present time, which was, that Parliament was not attentive to the interests or liberties of the people. He moved an amendment on the clauses he objected to.

Lord ELLENBOROUGH said, the clause was no doubt objectionable as conferring discretionary powers, but there was no choice but that of entrusting such a discretionary power, or of leaving the people to be inflamed by the meetings which it was the object of the Bill to guard against.

Some farther conversation took place between Lords GRENVILLE, HOLLAND, LAUDERDALE, and the Lord CHANCELLOR. The amendments moved, with the exception of one or two of a verbal nature were negatived; and the Bill was ordered to be reported on Monday.

*Monday, March 24.*

SEDITIOUS MEETINGS BILL.

The Earl of SHAFTESBURY reported the Seditious Meetings Bill.

The LORD CHANCELLOR proposed several verbal amendments, which were agreed to.

Lord HOLLAND ( with respect to the punishment of death ) again moved the Amendment which he had brought forward in the Committee, it was negatived.

With respect to the Licenses granted to Lecture Rooms and Debating Societies,

The Earl of LAUDERDALE thought the exceptions from the operation of this clause did not extend far enough, and that there could be no objection to include in those exceptions Lectures merely on physical science. He was the more anxious upon this point, because in Edinburgh, where the Magistrates were the Patrons of the University, they might be induced, for the sake of promoting the interests of the University, to put down all private Lectures, and it was well known that the Students frequently derived more advantage from the latter, than from what they learned within the University. He wished to confine his Amendment to the physical sciences, in order to obviate the objection that Lectures upon morality, religion, and some other topics, might be liable to be abused. His Lordship then moved a clause, exempting from the operation of the licensing enactments, Lectures on Anatomy, Pharmacy, Midwifery, Astronomy, Chemistry, or other branches of physical science.

Lord Viscount MELVILLE said, that the power of licensing would not be limited to the Magistrates of Edinburgh, who were the Patrons of the University, but would be possessed under the Bill by all the Justices of Peace in that City, and equally also within the City by the Justices for the County.

The Clause was negatived.

On the Clause respecting Clubs or Societies, the Members of which were required to sign any test or declaration,

Lord HOLLAND observed, that it was too extensive in its wording. There were many Clubs or Societies in this Metropolis, in which the Members were perhaps called upon to sign some declaration merely relating to the payment of a subscription, or the drinking of certain toasts. The Members of these Societies might naturally feel repugnant to submit mere nonsense to the inspection of Justices of the Peace, and he haw no reason why they should be subjected to the inconvenience. Freemasons were excepted, and why should not other Societies, equally harmless in their object?

Lord ERSKINE remarked, it was important to observe, that this part of the Bill was intended to be permanent, and therefore they should be undoubtedly more cautious as to what they enacted. Their object certainly ought to be to impose as few restrictions as possible upon the people, because by imposing unnecessary restraints they might produce discontent, and excite a spirit of hostility in place of that love which persons bore to a country having the sacred character of freedom. There were other Societies besides Freemasons which might have, perhaps, tests equally solemn, but which were equally harmless.

The Earl of LIVERPOOL said, there was no intention whatever of subjecting to inconvenience mere Convivial Societies, which might he productive of pleasure or advantage to individuals. But if any clubs or societies had any test or declaration, attended with any solemnity, it was but fair that they should be subjected to the superintendence in that respect of Justices of the Peace.

The Clause was then agreed to.

An Amendment, proposed by Earl GROSVENOR, to limit the duration of the Bill to the 1st July 1817, was negatived.

Lord Viscount Sidmouth proposed a clause to prohibit public meetings within a mile of the two Houses of Parliament when sitting, or of the Courts of Justice when sitting at Westminster.

The Earl of ROSSLYN contended, that there was no reason why the inhabitants of Westminster should not have the exercise of a privilege,which was possessed by the inhabitants of every other part of London. He should have preferred that a Clause of so much importance had been introduced into the Bill at first, rather than now, towards the very close of any discussion upon it.

Lord Liverpool said, it was certainly most desirable that the Members of their Lordships' House, and of the other House of Parliament, should not be exposed to those gross outrages which has sometimes occurred, when coming down to Parliament in the exercise of their public duty; their dignity imperiously demanded such a protection.

After some observations by Lords Lauderdale, Erskine and Grenville, the clause was agreed to and the Amendments being all gone through, the Bill was then ordered to be read a third time tomorrow, and the House adjourned.
```

```{admonition} The Manchester Plot, 1817
:class: seealso

Shortly after the Blanketeers March, a plot was foiled in Manchester relating to a general uprising.  See related note [here](./64_manchester_plot.md).
```

By the time the trials of the Blanketeer marchers came to Court, there was little appetite to prosecute the men, particularly as it wasn't clear whether they had actually done anything to break the law.

```{admonition} The Trial of the Blanketeers, September 1817
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000081/18170912/006/0003
Liverpool Mercury - Friday 12 September 1817

*The Blanketeers.— Lancaster Assizes.*

On Saturday last, a special jury was appointed to try the *Blanketeers*, as they were called, from Manchester. They were charged with convening a tumultuous and riotous assembly, under the pretext for petitioning; and for conspiring to insult and intimidate his Royal Highness the Prince Regent, by collecting large multitudes of people, and conspiring to repair to London to present petitions and remonstrances, &c. to him. There were seven of these men indicted: three were defended by Mr. Williams, and four by Mr. Holt.— When the trial was called on, Mr. Topping, the leading counsel for the crown, rose and said, "That it was not his intention to offer any evidence against the defendants. At the time the charge was preferred, Manchester was much agitated; but tranquillity now prevailed throughout the county, and a new tone and condition of things had arisen. That his Majesty's government, therefore, never desirous to prosecute any of the king's subjects, but in cases where the public safety demanded it, thought it unnecessary to press any thing against the defendants under the present circumstances, and therefore, he, Mr. Topping, should offer no evidence." The defendants were accordingly acquitted.
```

```{admonition} Collapse of the Trial of the Blanketeers, September 1817
:class: dropdown
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000081/18170919/024/0007
Liverpool Mercury - Friday 19 September 1817

THE BLANKETEERS.

[*From the Manchester Gazette.*]

We have this week to congratulate our readers on the termination of another political prosecution. Of the nine persons who were committed to Lancaster Castle as Blanketeers, on or about the 21st of March last, two were discharged some time ago, under circumstances, with the particulars of which we are unaquainted but we believe on bail to appear in the King's Bench, and the remaining seven were ordered for trial, by a special jury, on Saturday last, before Mr. Baron Wood. But the courage of the prosecutors could not bear up against the weakness of their cause, and the men were discharged without trial. We find it is intended by those who have had the direction of this prosecution, to take credit for leniency and for bearance; and the prisoners may possibly be told, as Dr Watson was in effect, and almost in terms?, by the London ministerial papers, that they ought to be grateful they have not been hanged without ceremony. It shall be our business to enquire whether they have any thing to be grateful for.

Let it be remembered then, that on the 10th of March a meeting peacably assembled for a purpose of which the legality has never been disproved, though its impropriety has been generally admitted, was dispersed in a very summary and unceremonious manner — that no mild remonstrances no conciliatory admonitions were given to the mistaken populace; but that without even the customary form of reading the riot act, which the law then at least peremptorily enjoined, the dragoons, acting we suppose under the orders of civil officers, galloped amongst the defenceless and unresisting multitude and dispersed them in all directions — that from this operation, death in two instances ensued, in one of which cases, the coroner's inquest returned a verdict of "Wilful murder against some soldier unknown"— that the military and constables were dispatched after some hundreds of simpletons, who had set out on the fool's errand of a march to London and that of these, upwards of two hundred and fifty were taken into custody, and carried under a powerful escort to the New Bayley prison, which contained, even previous to their arrival, nearly three times the number of prisoners it was originally calculated to receive — that they were there confined many, or the whole of them, we know not which, for at least nine days and nights until "with the sanction of government," they were liberated -— that previous to their being discharged, many were bound over to keep the peace, which they had not broken, some under sureties, and others in their personal recognizances; and that when the bulk were disposed of, there still remained nine whom the magistrates thought proper to commit to Lancaster castle. Let it be remembered, that these nine persons were committed in time for trial at the spring assizes — that, for some purpose of their prosecutors, over which the prisoners had no control, but for which, *doubtless they ought to feel grateful*, they were not then tried, although the day for their trial was actually fixed, and their witnesses were all in Lancaster `[It is not a little extraordinary that on the very   morning of the day fixed for the trial of the Blanketeers, at the Spring Assizes, a Writ of Certiorari be produced on the part of the Crown; particularly as this proceeding followed quite close upon a previous declaration by a Reverend and Patriotric Gentleman who resides in the neighbourhood of Liverpool ??? would take care that the men had Counsel for their particular defence; previous to which declaration (and ?? to the time for the trial was fixed) it had been ???? they would be completely undefended.]` — and that from that time to the present, they have experienced all the unmitigated horrors of close and rigorous imprisonment — that they were again ordered for trial at the assizes which have just concluded by a special jury, very extraordinarily composed, though, no doubt, chosen in a manner perfectly legal — that they were in such circumstances, as to be completely destitute of the means of obtaining a defence —that, however, by the assistance of some persons, who thought them hardly used, witnesses had been, at considerable expence, brought over to Lancaster and two eminent counsel retained in their behalf, both of whom strongly maintained that the prisoners had broken no law, and consequently could not be convicted of any offence— that when the day fixed upon for the trial came, and they were prepared and anxious to meet it, the prosecutors shrunk from the investigation they themselves had instituted, and withdrew the charge.— Let all these facts be remembered and we believe not one of them can be disproved, and then let their prosecutors claim credit for forbearance, if they can.

Who the prosecutors really are in this case, we are entirely ignorant. We understand however, from very good authority, although Mr Topping's observations seem to imply the contrary, that government some time ago distinctly disclaimed all connection or participation in it, and that, therefore all the responsibility rests with some person or persons in this neighbourhood. To us, it appears one of the most cruel cases of oppression we have ever met with; and knowing, as we do, that, subsequent to the period at which government is said to have disclaimed any interference in the affair, active exertions were used to obtain evidence in order to strengthen the cases against the prisoners, and this up to the very time of the commencement of the assizes, we think the public will easily decide upon the true nature of the motives that have inflamed the prosecutors.

The reason assigned by Mr Topping for calling no evidence in the case, viz. "the restoration of tranquillity in this district," we do not hesitate to consider as a subterfuge, intended to conceal from the public the real cause of the line of conduct which was adopted. We assert, as we have asserted before, that the tranquillity of this district has never been disturbed; and we have no doubt that the charge against the Blanketeers was withdrawn only because their prosecutors preferred an awkward and ridiculous retreat to the almost absolute certainty of public and unpitied discomfiture. We think likewise, knowing the general feeling of lawyers upon the case, and the sentiments of the Judge, as said to have been expressed at the spring assizes, that it was prudent of them not to expose their conduct to the comments of the independent bar. Perhaps the poverty of the accused may prevent their being called upon to account for their conduct in a court of justice, but we think a very strong case of false imprisonment might easily be made out against them; for it surely is not to be tolerated, that Englishmen should be dragged to a dungeon, confined there during a long and lingering period of imprisonment, and at last be dismissed at the pleasure of we know not whom, without trial, and consequently without the opportunity of substantiating their innocence.

We have been the more free in our comments on this transaction, because we believe the opinion to be general amongst lawyers, that *the prisoners had committed no offence, either in law or fact* `[The indictment in fact did not on *the face it charge any thing* which is known to the law as a crime.]`; and our readers will be surprised to learn, that such was the laughable weakness even of the principal charge, that *there was actually appended to its tail*, a count in the indictment, under which the prisoners were accused of begging!!!

We do not wish to refer to any thing which took place in March last, in which we were individually concerned, yet we do not feel that we can with propriety, omit to request that our readers sill remember, that a learned magistrate then thought proper to animadvert upon our conduct with some severity from the bench. Some of the remarks we had made upon the then recent proceedings were censured (at least so the papers stated) as "highly libellous."— We should be glad to know whether that epithet was applied to them because they were false, or because they were true; for we believe, that every assertion or prediction we then ventured to make, has since been most fully confirmed. It is now generally admitted, that the meeting of the 10th March was dispersed by the soldiery without any reading of the riot act; and, we believe, that it will not be denied that this proceeding was illegal. Nay, it formed the professed and avowed ground, as we understood at the time, upon which the coroner's jury, in the case of the man killed at Heaton Norris, returned a verdict of "Wilful murder;" and we have seen, as we said it would be found, that none of the persons arrested in this neighbourhood on charges of treason were ever intended to be brought to trial.

Whatever motives may he attributed to us now, we know our own object to be conciliatory, and our views constitutional. To the poor we recommend it always to confine themselves within the usual and acknowledged limits of constitutional proceeding; and upon those who are vested with authority, we would strongly enforce the duty of tempering justice with mercy— of not creating or feeding public alarm by hasty or exaggerated statements of public danger, of confining themselves in the discharge of their duties strictly and scrupulously within the limits of the law, seeing that any assumption of more than legal authority, is less excusable in those whose duty it is to administer, and consequently to understand, the law, than even a transgression of it by those in whom such transgression may fairly be attributed to ignorance or misapprehension.

On looking back to the alarming statements which were authoritatively circulated about the period to which we have referred, we are sometimes tempted to smile at the contrast exhibited between them and the actual state of facts as they really existed at the time, and as they are now generally admitted to have existed. But every feeling of levity is checked by the recollection of the horrible and arbitrary legislative proceedings, which were founded upon them, and which they were intended to excuse. We cannot smile when we reflect that there is an unknown number of our neighbours and fellow-townsmen, still lingering in solitary imprisonment—that they are, till we know not what distant period, doomed to pine through the miserable interval of existence, debarred from every intercourse with their fellow-men, shut almost absolutely "from the common use of air and of their own limbs," and dependent for their restoration to society, not upon the favourable termination of a public and constitutional trial, but upon the capricious and wayward determination of those who must hate, because they have injured them.

We know well the share which spies and plot-creators have had in the present suspension of the constitution. We consider this neighbourhood as containing the nucleus from which the whole brood were hatching; and we trust in Heaven the time is fast approaching, when the spy system and its abettors will be held up: as they deserve, to the contempt and indignation of every honest man.
```

Many years later, in 1893, the tale of the Blanketeers was recalled in Samuel Bamford's memoir.

```{admonition} Bamford recalls The Blanketeers, 1893
:class: dropdown
https://archive.org/details/cu31924088007962/page/n34/mode/1up
Bamford's Passages in the life of a radical, and Early days
by Bamford, Samuel, 1788-1872

Publication date 1893

pp. 31-35

CHAPTER V.  
HABEAS CORPUS ACT SUSPENDED — BLANKET MEETING AT MANCHESTER — MARCH AND DISPERSION OF THE BLANKETEERS — TREASONABLE PLOT — JOSEPH HEALEY, THE DOCTOR; HIS OBSERVATIONS AND DISCOVERIES IN THE WELKIN.

Soon afterwards I left the great Babylon, heartily tired of it, and returned to Middleton, where events rapidly pressed on my attention.

On the morning of Sunday, the 8th of March, Benbow called on me at Middleton. I had lost sight of him since my return from London; the Habeas Corpus Act was already suspended, and I supposed from some remarks of his that he had thought it best not to be so much in public at Manchester as he previously had been. He had, however, taken a great share in getting up and arranging the Blanket Meeting; and now, after commending the intended proceeding, and dwelling on the good effects it would produce, he asked me to join in the meeting and expedition, and to bring as many of my neighbours as I could. I flatly refused; and stated my reasons, which will shortly appear. He enlarged his commendations, calculating with certainty that the Blanketeers would march to London, thousands in number; and that their petitions would be graciously, if not with some awe, received by the Prince Regent in person. I maintained my opinions — he answered with reproaches; I treated the plan as a chimera, and held lightly the judgment of its proposers and concoctors, Benbow went away in a huff, and I remained with a lowered opinion of my former comrade.

On the night of Sunday, the 9th of March, I was requested to attend a meeting in the house of one of my neighbours, where a number of friends wished to hear my opinion with reference to the Blanket Meeting. I went to them and spoke freely in condemnation of the measure. I endeavoured to show them that the authorities of Manchester were not likely to permit their leaving the town in a body, with blankets and petitions, as they proposed; that they could not subsist on the road; that the cold and wet would kill numbers of them, who were already enfeebled by hunger and other deprivations; that soldiers always marched in divisions for the easier procurement of food and lodgings; and that an irregular multitude like themselves, could not, on an emergency, be provisioned, and quartered. That they need not expect to be welcome wherever they went, especially in such of the rotten boroughs as fell in their way, against the franchise of which they were petitioning; that the inhabitants would bolt their doors against them; and that if they took possession by force there was the law to punish them. That many persons might join their ranks who were not reformers but enemies to reform, hired perhaps to bring them and their cause into disgrace; that if these persons began to plunder on the road, the punishment and disgrace would be visited on the whole body; that they would be denounced as robbers and rebels, and the military would be brought to cut them down or take them prisoners. In conclusion, I earnestly cautioned them against having anything to do with the proposed meeting, and intimated that the parties who had got it up were not to be depended upon; that their blind zeal overran every reasonable consideration; and that if they, my neighbours, took part in the meeting, they would probably repent when it was too late. Whether it was in consequence of what I said I cannot tell; but I was afterwards gratified on hearing that no person from Middleton went as a Blanketeer.

But of this meeting, which was our first great absurdity, I must write more particularly.

It was one of the bad schemes which accompanied us from London, and was the result of the intercourse of some of the deputies with the leaders of the London operatives — the Watsons, Prestons, and Hoopers. Mitchell and Benbow had cultivated a rather close acquaintance with these men, little suspecting, I have no doubt, that their new friends had already fallen under the influence of instigators who betrayed all their transactions to the Government. But the London leaders, or at least such of them as I conversed with, were, as I have shown, men of frank character and bearing, and apparently of sincere intention; and their manner, flattering by the confidence it bestowed, naturally led to a reciprocal feeling, and to the formation of connections, the effects of which now began to appear.

Our maxim had hitherto in all our proceedings been— "Hold fast by the laws." It was the maxim of Major Cartwright, our venerable political father, and had been adhered to with a religious observance. But doctrines varying from this now began to be broached, and measures hinted, which, if not in direct contravention of the law, were but ill-disguised subterfuges for evading its intentions.

The meeting took place according to appointment; but I not being there, my brief description must be taken as the account of others. The assemblage consisted almost entirely of operatives, four or five thousand in number; and was held on that piece of ground (St. Peter's Field) which afterwards obtained so melancholy a celebrity. Many of the individuals were observed to have blankets, rugs, or large coats, rolled up and tied, knapsack like, on their backs; some carried bundles under their arms; some had papers, supposed to be petitions rolled up; and some had stout walking sticks. The magistrates came upon the field and read the Riot Act `[TH: newspaper reports do not say the Riot Act was read.]`; the meeting was afterwards dispersed by the military and special constables, and twenty-nine persons were apprehended, amongst whom were two young men, named Bagguley and Drummond, who had recently come into notice as speakers, and who being in favour of extreme measures, were much listened to and applauded. But my warm friend, Benbow, took care not to make his appearance on that occasion.

On the Riot Act being read, about three hundred persons left the meeting to commence their march to London. Some of them formed a straggling line in Mosley Street, and marched along Piccadilly, being continually joined by others, until the whole body was collected, near Ardwick Green. The appearance of these misdirected people was calculated to excite in considerate minds pity rather than resentment. Some appeared to have strength in their limbs and pleasure in their features, others already with doubt in their looks and hesitation in their steps. A few were decently clothed and well appointed for the journey; many were covered only by rags which admitted the cold wind, and were already damped by a gentle but chilling rain. Some appeared young, with health on their cheeks, every care behind and hope alone before; the thoughts of others were probably reverting to their homes on the hill-sides, or in the sombre alleys of the town, where wives and children had resigned them for a time, in hopes of their return with plenty, and never more to part. Here a youth was waving his hand to a damsel pale and tremulous with alarm; yonder an attenuated being, giving back, after kissing it, a poorly child to the arms of its mother— he hastens towards his comrades with willing but feeble steps, looking back on those, so poor, but oh! how dear —— the child is hushed with a caress, the mother turning it gently to her cold and nurtureless bosom, nurtureless of everything save deep and tender love. Her looks are still directed the way he goes; he has disappeared: and whilst her tears flow the poor but cleanly mantle is drawn over the little one, and in a conflict of grief, hope, and fear, she thoughtfully wends to her obscure and cheerless abode. A body of yeomanry soon afterwards followed those simple-minded men, and took possession of the bridge at Stockport. Many then turned back to their homes; a body of them crossed the river below, and entered Cheshire; several received sabre wounds, and one man was shot dead on Lancashire hill. Of those who persisted in their march it is only necessary to say that they arrived at nine o'clock at night in the market place at Macclesfield, being about one hundred and eighty in number. Some of them lay out all night, and took the earliest dawn to find their way home. Some were well lodged and hospitably entertained by friends; some paid for quarters, and some were quartered in prison. Few were those who marched the following morning. About a score arrived at Leek, and six only were known to pass Ashborne bridge. And so ended the Blanket Expedition! 'What would you really have done," I said to one of them, "supposing you had got to London?" "Done?" he replied, in surprise at the question; "why iv wee'd nobbo gett'n to Lunnun, we shud ha' tan th' nation, an' sattl't o'th dett." Such, and about as rational, were some of the incoherent dreams which at this time began to find favour in the eyes of the gross multitude.

But another cause was assigned for the dispersion of the Blanketeers. It was said that a purse containing from thirty to fifty pounds having been made up, was given to one of the principal leaders, with instructions to proceed on the London road a day or two in advance, to procure food and lodgings for money, where they could not be had for friendship or a more urgent motive. That "the good man," by some mistake, got out of the right way, and wandering far into Yorkshire, he never found himself till the money was all spent; and the Blanketeers, thus losing their commissary and paymaster, were broken by the same means which had dispersed more numerous armies, viz., want of necessaries; and thus "the nation" was saved for that time. However true or otherwise this account may be, it is certain that the man suddenly disappeared (but others did the same) and was out of the way a month or two, after which he paid a visit to Middleton on his return, as he said, from Yorkshire to Manchester. He was always somewhat doubted afterwards; and his last appearance in this quarter was in the character of an adroit crimp to a fortune-promising attorney.

...
```

The Hammonds reviewed the episode in *The Skilled Labourer*, 1919, suggesting that only a single petititoner, a Mr. Abel Couldwell, of Stalybridge, made it as far as London, where he presented his petition to Lord Sidmouth on March 18th, 1817.

```{admonition} The Plan of the Great March, 1919
:class: dropdown
https://archive.org/details/skilledlabourer100hammuoft/page/344/mode/2up
The Skilled labourer 1760-1832
by Hammond, J. L. (John Lawrence), 1872-1949; Hammond, Barbara Bradby, 1873-1961

Publication date 1919

pp. 344-

The plan of the great march was carefully organised. It was to be all open and above board, and the constables were invited to attend. Bagguley had unearthed some Act of the time of Charles II from which he had got the idea that it was legal for ten out of every twenty petitioners to go and present their petition. Hence the idea of a great march to London to present petitions to the Prince Regent. There would be a leader for every ten, and a leader for every hundred, and if any man wanted anything he was to apply to his leader of ten, who next applied to the leader of the hundred, who in turn would apply to the 'provisioners.' It was calculated that in six days they would reach London and that they would have to sleep on the ground or in churches on the way, hence the need for blankets. The question of support on the way had to be considered. It was suggested that those remaining behind at work should contribute 2s. 6d., 3s., even 5s. a week — or what they could afford — either to the families of the marchers or to the marchers themselves. The arrangements for commissariat were perhaps a little vague. 'A gentleman,' Bagguley told the would-be marchers, 'has calculated that you can do it on oatmeal and water.' `[H.O.,42. 164.]`

The spinners took an active part in the organisation of the march. To the surprise of the magistrates, though exempt from the pressure of the times, they were discontented. This is perhaps less surprising to others, seeing that their wages are said to have fallen by one-third from 1814 to 1817. `[Committee on Artisans and Machinery, 1824, p. 411.]` They were said to have given 5s. each in addition to the donation of £20 from the box of a Friendly Society. `[H.O., 40. 10.]` About this donation full particulars were sent to the authorities from a firm of employers two of whose men had been deputed to give the sum. `[ Ibid., 42. 161.]` The Society was a Sick Club composed of the spinners from nine or ten mills, and founded only the previous Whitsuntide with the sole ostensible object of relieving the sick and burying the dead. `[It is, of course, impossible to say how far the statements about these clubs are true.]` The club had about £30 in hand, and out of this the majority of subscribing mills had voted about £22 'towards defraying the Expenses of carrying Petitions to be presented to His Royal Highness the Prince Regent begging Redress of grievances.' The men, however, who were appointed to present the money arrived too late at the meeting. One Meldrum was sent by the spinners by coach to London, to look after the proceedings, but he was arrested on the way at Nottingham as a suspicious character. `[H.O., 42. 164, and 42. 161.]`

Each petitioner was to carry his petition wrapped in a bit of brown paper and tied round his right arm with a bow of white tape. `[Ibid., 42. 164.]` Some well-thumbed copies of the petition, written or printed, lie amongst the Home Office Papers. `[Ibid., 42. 162.]` It is difficult enough to understand how the authorities could connect this pathetic and futile outcry with any 'traitorous conspiracy.' Before the last war, say the petitioners, we neither felt nor feared difficulties and privations, our repeated applications have been disregarded, taxation has been quadrupled, rent has doubled, the whole produce of the Kingdom is absorbed and nothing is left for us. Had the House of Commons been appointed by the people at large these evils could not have happened, nor would the Corn Bill nor the Libel Law nor the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act have been passed. Hence we pray you to dismiss your Ministers. Our lives are in your hands; if you will not relieve us, 'we can neither support you nor ourselves.' The marchers were far from being the active revolutionaries pictured by the Secret Committee. To judge from their subsequent depositions few had clear ideas of their object or the meaning of the petition. They only knew that times were bad and that this plan might bring some help. When one of them who said he was going to London about the Habeas Corpus was asked what the Habeas Corpus was, he answered, 'he could not tell but it was to mend the trade.' `[H.O., 42. 161.]` Another was going 'to petition the Prince to make a better living.' A childish belief in the power of the first gentleman in Europe to redress their wrongs was held by many of the marchers. 'All I was to say,' said one of them, 'when we were to go down on our knees before the Prince was to ask him for help — the most miserable looking of us was to kneel down and the others to take the petition and the Prince would then tell us why trade was so slack.' `[Ibid., 42. 162.]`

The 10th of March was the day appointed for starting. There was to be a 'send off' from a meeting in St. Peter's Fields. The majority of the marchers were weavers, few were over thirty, many were under twenty. `[Ibid. 40, 10.]` Their womenkind seem to have used some violent language. 'The Women of the lower Class,' wrote Mr. Evans, the stipendiary magistrate, afterwards, 'seem to take a strong part against the Preservation of good Order, and in the course of the morning of the 10th it was a very general and undisguised Cry amongst them that the Gentry had had the upper Hand long enough and that their turn was now come.' `[Ibid., 42. 162,]`

No dangerous sentiments are reported to have been uttered by the would-be marchers themselves. The plan, however, seemed full of danger to the authorities. Nadin, writes Mr. Hay, J.P., says that 'as they go through the country they will breed a Commotion in the towns as they go along and by that they will have a heavy body together and try at a Revolution.' `[H.O., 42. 161.]` It was decided that the desperadoes must be stopped. The meeting was allowed to take place, but a detachment of dragoons under General Byng rode up and surrounded the hustings, whilst the civil authorities (special constables) arrested twenty-nine persons including Bagguley and Drummond. `[Ibid., 42. 161. Was the Riot Act read? J. E. Taylor thinks probably not (see Prentice, op. cit.t p. 93). Cf. Peterloo.]` This had the effect of dispersing the meeting, but several hundred marchers had already set out. The dragoons, yeomanry, and special constables set off after them and came upon the main body as they were stepping quietly along, before they reached Stockport; one hundred and sixty-seven were taken prisoners and sent back to Manchester. Only one man, John James, was killed, and he had nothing to do with the Blanketeers. He was watching the procession from his garden in Heaton Norris when some one near threw a stone, whereupon one of the regular soldiers came into his garden and killed him by cutting his head open. `[At the coroner's inquest a verdict of Wilful Murder was returned but no one was brought to trial (see H.O., 42. 162).]` The marchers were not all stopped near Stockport. Some four or five hundred straggled into Macclesfield tired and footsore. `[H.O., 42. 162.]` Five hundred were said to have got as far as Leek, but as they marched on towards Derby they found the Hanging Bridge over the river Dove near Ashborne occupied by yeomanry, who expected some thirty thousand men to march upon them. Most turned back, some twenty-five were taken into custody. `[Ibid., 42. 161.]` A few, in spite of the force at the Hanging Bridge, got as far as Derby whence they were persuaded to return, some were said to have reached Loughborough `[Ibid., 42. 162.]`; one, at any rate, Abel Couldwell of Stalybridge, reached London and presented his petition to Lord Sidmouth for the Prince Regent on March 18. `[Ibid., 42. 163.]`

The 'knapsack' prisoners, as they were called, were a serious embarrassment to the magistrates, and the prospect of the arrival of twenty-five more sent back by the magistrates of Staffordshire and Derbyshire was not greeted with enthusiasm. 'They might have made cases of Vagrancy very well against them in Staffordshire and Derby,' wrote Mr. Lloyd of Stockport, who was playing a zealous part in the affair, 'and,' he adds, 'it may be running no risque to have them convicted in acts of Vagrancy here.' `[H.O., 42. 161.]` Not only were the prisons already overcrowded, but awkward questions as to the legality of the arrests began to be asked. The Home Office advised on March 5 that those who were deluded by others and were now contrite should be set free. `[Secret Letter Book, H.O., 79. 3.]` The magistrates acted on this advice, but there were some who were not contrite; what was to be done with them? Five at least were such stubborn Britons that they refused to find sureties, declaring they had done nothing wrong. One of them, George Grimshaw, would not allow his employer to offer bail ; another, Thomas Leigh, a boy of seventeen, was 4 very obstinate in maintaining the Propriety of his Conduct,' and would not let his friends give bail. These five with four others were committed for trial at the August Assizes. `[H.O., 42. 162.]` Mr. Evans thought some prosecutions for misdemeanour essential — otherwise actions might be begun against the magistrates and municipal officers. It might indeed be 'desirable to be provided with certioraries for removing the cases into the King's Bench at the discretion of the gentleman who may be employed as counsel,' though if the case could be brought to trial with a strong expectation of conviction it would be very beneficial 'for the Jury of this County who feel the situation which we are in will I apprehend not be indisposed so far as is fairly consistent with the Merits of the case.' `[Ibid., 42. 165.]`

It is worth while to record what the prisoners themselves, whose conviction was to be so beneficial, were thinking as they lay week after week in prison. In May they sent a letter written by one of them, William Wood, to Lord Sidmouth: `[Ibid.]`

'In behalf of Myself and fellow Prisoners, 8 in number, who humbly crave your Assistance, in our present Distress, we was taken by the Military and Civil Powers on Monday, March 10th last, nearly at Noontide, betwixt Manchester and Stockport, on our Journey for London with an Intent of presenting a Petition to the Prince Regent, for a redress of our Grievances which was dreadfull in the extreme, our Familys being nearly in a state of Starvation, and having no means of paying our Rent, and nearly Naked, as such we thought it a duty incumbant there was upwards of Two Hundred Persons taken that Day, and Lodged in the New Bailey Manchester the rest was Liberated, in a few Days, excepting Nine as mention'd above, we was detained in the Lockups, five of us Nine Days and Nights the other four of which I was one 13 Days and Nights with nothing but bare flaggs, to sleep upon, which I found affected my health being nearly 6l Years of Age, when Committed to Lancaster Castle, we was sent in Irons, some of our property was detain'd at the New Bailey, amongst which was a Sum of Money, advanc'd by our Relations and Friends to defray our expences on the Journey, wee made Application to the Governor of this Castle he advised us to Apply to the Magistrates of Manchester, as such we wrote a Petition to them which was presented, by a friend, We did so, and by them order'd to apply to Mr. Nadin Deputy Constable, we apply'd to Mr. Nadin, but he would not deliver the Money. My Lord we hope you will take our case into Consideration and as we trust in your Clemency we rest in hopes we shall not be disappointed, as We do assure your Lordship, we really thought we was doing our duty, as real Friends to the Laws & Constitution of our Country. . . ,' `[Mr. Evans' comment on this is the characteristic official assurance that every attention was paid to the prisoners. Since, however, there were only 140 sleeping cells in the prison and there were already 560 prisoners before the conspirators came in, the accommodation was necessarily rough. As for the property, all had been returned except the money collected round the hustings, of which £1, 3s. 6d. had been found on Grimshaw, one of the prisoners. It would be interesting to know the ultimate destiny of this money. £20 had also been taken from Bagguley and Drummond.]`

The last incident in the tragic comedy of the Blanketeers is the sending of a confidential letter from the Under- Secretary of State to Mr. Fletcher of Bolton. This letter is fortunately preserved in the Secret Letter Book. `[H.O., 79. 3.]` 'The only Government prosecution at Lancaster,' writes that gentleman, 'is that against a few of the obstinate Blanketeers. It is an extremely difficult case to deal with, and I am very much disposed to think that after the prisoners have sustained about five months Imprisonment it will be more prudent to make a merit of letting them off, than to run the risque of a Verdict after an inflammatory speech of Mr. Brougham or some such Orator.' The eight prisoners were accordingly discharged without trial. `[See petition from Manchester, Hansard, February 9, 1818.]`

```

```{admonition} Tragic Failure or Pioneer Protest?, 2011
:class: dropdown seealso
https://perspectivia.net/servlets/MCRFileNodeServlet/pnet_derivate_00004236/schulte_beerbuehl_blanketeers.pdf

In MATTHIAS REISS AND MATT PERRY (eds.), Unemployment and Protest: New Perspectives on Two Centuries of Contention (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011)

pp. 59–74

Creative Commons CC BY-NC-ND licence

The March of the Blanketeers: Tragic Failure or Pioneer of Unemployed Protest?

MARGRIT SCHULTE BEERBDHL

Unemployed protest marches are generally associated with the 1920s and 1930s. The unemployed marches of the inter-war years were certainly unprecedented in terms of scale, frequency, and level of organization, but they were not a new phenomenon. The British unemployed began to march to London with increasing frequency in the early twentieth century, and some very early forerunners date back to the early nineteenth century. The best documented of these early nineteenth-century marches is that of the Blanketeers in March 1817.

At a time when political protests, machine-breaking, and widespread unrest were shaking the country, several thousand mostly unemployed or underemployed weavers decided to march to London to petition the Prince Regent for relief. The march was to start simultaneously for London from a number of places in the textile areas of the north and the Midlands. As the participants were seen carrying blankets, rugs, or large coats with them, they came to be known as the Blanketeers.

Although the march is one of the 'three famous events' of 1817, not many labour historians have dealt with it in detail. Most either just mention it briefly, or refer to its early and unsuccessful ending. `[Stanley H. Palmer, Police and Protest in England and Ireland 1780-1850 (Cambridge, 1988), 184.]` The most detailed investigation into this event has been provided by the Hammonds and E. P. Thompson. The reasons for its neglect are twofold. First, the labour historiography of the early nineteenth century has largely focused on the question of whether Britain was on the verge of a revolution or not.

According to the Whig interpretation of the events of 1816-17, no plans for a general insurrection can be found, apart from the evidence of spies. `[G. D. H. Cole and R. Postgate, The Common People (1st edn. 1938; London, 1961), 217.]` In Stevenson's view, the radicals of the post-war years took up an essentially constitutional stance and the majority of disturbances in 1816 and 1817 were entirely apolitical. He doubted that there was much behind the talk of insurrection in the spring of 1817. `[John Stevenson, Popular Disturbances in England 1700-1870 (London, 1979), 206, 209-11.]` Left-wing historians such as Thompson, on the other hand, believe that there were, in fact, some preparations for a 'general insurrection'. `[E. P. Thompson, The Making of the English Working Class (1st edn. 1963; Harmondsworth, 1968), 713-14.]`

Secondly, the documentary evidence is thin, of questionable veracity, and leaves room for diverging interpretations. The available records were to a large extent written by government spies who instigated or even invented some of the insurrectionary events of that year. Other reports were written either by the police or the local authorities. A balanced view of the working-class movements of those years is therefore hardly possible. Spies were probably not actively involved in the march, but they had a hand in the preparation of the other famous events of 1817: the Huddersfield and Pentridge risings, which aimed to overthrow the government. It is not the intention of this essay to discuss whether there was a threat of general insurrection in 1817. It is, however, important to point out that the authorities to some extent believed that there was.

In contrast to historical evaluations of the Huddersfield and Pentridge risings, the march of the Blanketeers was viewed as 'a tragic comedy' and 'a tragic fiasco'. `[Ibid. 209; John Lawrence Hammond and Barbara Hammond, The Skilled Labourer 1760-1832 (1st edn. 1919; New York, 1967), 349.]` It was not the outcome of the march that caused the Hammonds and Thompson to pass this judgement. The other two events were equally unsuccessful. Contemporaries such as the two radicals Samuel Bamford and Archibald Prentice had already called the march 'a bad scheme', 'a chimera', and a 'folly' in their reminiscences. `[William Henry Chaloner (ed.), The Autobiography ofSamuel Bam.ford, 2 vols. (London, 1967), ii. 3o-1; Archibald Prentice, Historical Sketches and Personal Recollections of Manchester. Intended to Illustrate the Progress of Public Opinion from 1792 to 1832 (1st edn. 1851; London, 1979), 93.]` In the context of the reform and insurrectionary movement, the march seems oddly out of place. In order to understand why the march of the Blanketeers has been judged so negatively, this essay will start with a historical reconstruction of the event based on Home Office papers, contemporary newspapers, and the autobiography of Samuel Bamford before reassessing it within the framework of the contemporaneous pattern of social and political protests.

The March

The preparations for the march were in the hands of the radicals William Benbow, a shoemaker from Manchester, Joseph Mitchell, a draper from Liverpool, and Samuel Drummond and John Bagguley, both of Stockport. Mitchell's and Benbow's contribution to the event is, however, not quite clear. In the final stages of preparing the march, the leadership had passed to Bagguley and Drummond. `[The National Archives (hereafter TNA}, Home Office Papers (hereafter HO) 40/5, fos. 41-55; HO 3312, fos. 18-26.]` In Manchester itself, the workers looked to Bagguley as their leader. `[Ibid. 45-6.]` In all probability, either Bagguley or Mitchell first developed the idea for a great march. The historiography is contradictory on this matter. Prentice attributed the idea to Joseph Mitchell, while the Hammonds ascribed the idea to Bagguley. `[ Prentice, Historical Sketches, 92; see Hammond and Hammond, Skilled Labourer, 344-5.]` In their view, Bagguley had come up with the plan after he had found an old Act from the time of Charles II which suggested that it was legal for ten out of twenty people to petition the Prince Regent. `[HO 42/161, fos. 24-5; Chaloner (ed.), The Autobiography of Samuel Bamford, 3o-4; each petition carried by the marchers was to be signed by no more than twenty people in conformity with Charles II's Act against tumultuous petitioning; ten out of each twenty signatories could join the march. See also Donald Read, Peterloo: The 'Massacre' and its Background (1st edn. 1958; Clifton, NJ, 1973), 99 n. 2.]` Bamford mentioned that the plan was first developed in London. Benbow and Joseph Mitchell were supposed to have discussed the idea with Cobbett and Major Cartwright, who both agreed with it. `[Prentice, Historical Sketches, 92-3.]`

The preparations for the march were carefully laid. There would be a leader for every hundred marchers and a subordinate for every ten, and provisioners who had to supply the marchers with what they needed for the march were to be chosen. The organizers calculated that they would reach London in six days.

During their journey they would sleep either on the ground or in churches. Support for the marchers was to come from various sources. They hoped that the marchers would find many friends on the road, farmers and others, to assist them with food, money, and shelter. `[Those who stayed behind and earned 10s. a week were to give 5s. of their wages to support the families of the marchers (HO 40/5, fo. 53, 11 Mar. 1817); see also Hammond and Hammond, Skilled Labourer, 344-5; TNA, HO 40/5, fos. 49-50.]`

The planning was already far advanced when Benbow invited Bamford to what Bamford called a 'Blanket meeting' at Middleton. At this meeting he not only declined to participate in the march but also strongly discouraged his audience from taking part. Nevertheless, on the next day, 10 March, a meeting of thousands of operatives took place at St Peter's Field in Manchester. They carried rolled-up blankets and knapsacks on their backs. Some used walking sticks, and they had their petitions wrapped in brown paper. Estimates of the number assembled varied considerably, ranging from 12,000 to 30,000. `[TNA, HO 33/2, fo. 2o; HO 40/5, fos. 41-2; HO 33/161, fo. 11.]` Drummond and Bagguley were the main orators. They had already collected money for the support of the marchers and advised them to form themselves into groups of ten on the road at the very moment when the cavalry appeared. `[TNA, HO 40/5, fo. 45.]`

The next part of the story is well documented. Before the marchers could leave St Peter's Field, a detachment of dragoons under General John Byng appeared with the magistrates of Manchester and surrounded the orators. The magistrates read the Riot Act, the orators who were standing on a cart were arrested, and the meeting was dispersed by the military. Two hundred and sixty-seven people were arrested, but several hundred had already embarked on their journey to London. `[Ibid.]` A large number of these marchers were stopped by the yeomanry and the dragoons near Stockport, several were imprisoned, and many were sent back home. A group of several hundred nevertheless reached Macclesfield. Others were stopped at Leek, or at the Hanging Bridges over the river Dove near Ashborne, which divides the counties of Lancashire and Derbyshire. At this last location the yeomanry blocked their progress. Several more were seized; the majority was turned back. In all, several hundred were taken into custody, and so the march came to an early end. Those who were taken into custody remained in prison for either a few weeks or as much as several months before they were discharged without trial. `[TNA, HO 42/172, fo. 173.]` The march's apparent failure must be qualified. One marcher, Abel Couldwell from Stalybridge, did indeed reach London and presented his petition to Lord Sidmouth for the Prince Regent on 18 March. `[Hammond and Hammond, Skilled Labourer, 346-7.]` This last part of the Blanketeers' story, however, is often left out in labour histories of the early nineteenth century.

Those who went on the march were generally badly equipped and had to rely on public support for food, shelter, and accommodation. According to Bamford, their appearance was 'calculated to excite pity'. Some of them were covered in rags already soaked by the rain; others were 'decently clothed and well appointed for the journey'. The majority of the marchers were young men and weavers. Sympathy with the weavers was widespread. Some of those who came from as far as Macclesfield in 1817 found friends who lodged and entertained them. Some paid for their quarters, while others had to spend all night outside. `[Chaloner (ed.), The Autobiography of Samuel Bamford, 33-4.]`

The principal aim of the Blanketeers was to seek redress for their grievances. According to the evidence, the weavers were petitioning the Prince Regent in the hope of getting some sort of relief. In the petitions, several of which are among Home Office papers, they complained of increasing rents and taxation, the cost of the recent war, the Corn Laws, and the suspension of Habeas Corpus. They blamed the unreformed House of Commons for the deplorable state of their affairs. `[TNA, HO 42/162, fos. 395-7;Arthur Aspinall, The Early English Trade Unions: Documents from the Home Office Papers in the Public Record Office (London, 1949), 142.]`

The majority of the Blanketeers were probably handloom weavers, although Duncan Bythell in his history of the handloom weavers disputed this. He believes that other groups, especially the comparatively well-paid spinners, took part in it. `[Duncan Bythell, The Handloom Weavers (London, 1969), 211-12.]`

The sources convey a slightly equivocal message about the occupational background of participants. The spinners took part in the preparations for the march insofar as they provided, among other things, financial support. `[Thompson, Making of theEnglish Working Class, 709 n. 1.]` Unemployment among the weavers was high after 1815 and even those who still had work often received wages close to, or even below, subsistence level. Like all the later unemployed marchers, the organizers needed support from beyond the ranks of the unemployed. In 1817 financial help came from various sources, from the spinners' union and their sick clubs, from weavers and other working men who had work, from a public collection at the meeting at Petersfield, and also during the march itself. There were a few spinners among the marchers. However, those we have some information about had little or no work.

According to Thompson, the overwhelming majority were handloom weavers. `[See ibid. 712 n. 1.]` Some of them were demobilized soldiers who had turned to weaving or other related occupations. `[TNA, HO 44/3, fos. 188r-w.]`

An Untimely Event?

Given that the authorities and the military intercepted the Pentridge and Huddersfield risings at a very early stage without these events being described as tragedies, it is unreasonable to characterize the Blanketeers' march in this way on the grounds of its abortive, pre-empted nature. For a better understanding of the Blanketeers, three aspects have to be taken into account. First, we must note that the premisses of labour historians are predicated on models of movements for political reform or revolution, on the trade union movements, or on the pre-industrial food riot.

Although the march of the Blanketeers is generally subsumed under the reform or insurrectionary movements, it does not precisely fit into this category. Secondly, it is necessary to see the march within specific contemporary repertoires of social protest and to take into account the economic condition of the poverty-stricken weavers. And thirdly, we must consider to what extent the march fitted into the leaders' plans.

First, the march was a very peaceful matter, as contemporaries confirmed and historians underlined. `[John E. Archer, Social Unrest and Popular Protest in England 1780-1840(Cambridge, 2000), 66; Malcolm Chase, Early Trade Unionism: Fraternity, Skill and the Politics of Labour (Aldershot, 2000 ), 104.]` It formed part of the petitioning tradition in Britain dating back to at least the sixteenth century. Mass petitioning was a well-established and legal instrument to bring political pressure to bear on Parliament. `[For the petitioning tradition see Colin Leys, 'Petitioning in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries', Political Studies, 3 (1955), 45-64; Peter Fraser, 'Public Petitioning and Parliament before 1832', History, 46 (1961), 195-211; for earlier forms of petitioning see Richard W. Hoyle, 'Petitioning as Popular Politics in Early Sixteenth-Century England', Historical Research, 75 (2002), 365-89.]` Nor was this form of political activity new to the working classes. The working people of London had frequently used it since at least the early eighteenth century and the northern handloom weavers' petitioning campaigns for a minimum wage of 1808-9 clearly reveal that these had become an established pattern of protest in that trade.

Although the Blanketeers demanded a reformed House of Commons, their main objective was to seek redress for their economic grievances. In his speech at St Peter's Field, Drummond was believed to have said: 'It is not riot and disturbance we want, it is bread we want and we will apply to our Noble Prince as a child would to its Father for bread.' `[TNA, HO 40/5, fo. 43, 10 Mar. 1817.]` Reform was not at the forefront of their aims, but just one means among others to get redress. The idea of a march developed after other demands for an economic remedy had failed. `[TNA, HO 42/161, fos. 24-5.]` The objective of the Pentridge and the Huddersfield risings, in contrast, was a revolutionary one. Operatives from all parts of England were to rise and march to London to overthrow the government.

Secondly, it has to be stressed that collective action by the lower classes largely operated within a sphere of illegality at that time. Trade unions were illegal until 1825 and collective action of whatever kind organized by the lower classes was seen as a threat to society, and therefore regarded as a matter of law and order by the ruling classes. Organized industrial and other peaceful collective action by the working classes was also still in its infancy. To make their demands heard, working people experimented with a variety of new collective methods of protest, such as collective bargaining, turnouts, riots, machine-breaking, and petitioning.

The type of collective protest which the workers chose depended on the structure of the trade, the existence of a trade club or union, the economic and social condition of the workers, the social composition of the protesters, their  relationship with the employers, and the region. Even within the same trade, workers changed their tactics according to circumstances. `[For the various forms of collective protest by organized workers see Margrit Schulte Beerbuhl, Vom Gesellenverein zur Gewerkschafl: Entwicklung, Struktur und Politik der Londoner Gesellenorganisationen 155o-1825 (Gi:ittingen, 1991), 237-99.]`

The years after the end of the Napoleonic Wars were a period when conflict between the working classes and the ruling classes reached a first peak. Social, political, and industrial demands overlapped. Since the outbreak of the French Revolution, radical and democratic ideas had begun to spread rapidly among the working classes. The first reform club, the Hampden Club, was founded in 1812. By 1816 these clubs had spread through the manufacturing districts and impressive public meetings were held in autumn and the following spring. There were also intermittent disorders throughout the Midlands, including a final outbreak of Luddism. Political unrest in the post-war years coincided with severe economic distress and high unemployment in the textile and mining areas.

During the first five years of the nineteenth century, the weavers had already experienced a sharp fall in their wages. Despite some short-term recoveries, for example, in 1818 after the strike, or in 1810-11, weavers were unable to halt a long-term fall in their wages. Even those who still had work in the post-war depression probably worked for wages at or below subsistence level. The weavers' real wages are difficult to assess because they were paid piece rates. As Bythell has established, piece rates varied considerably from place to place and were also subject to violent short-term fluctuations. The Hammonds estimated that in 1814 weavers could earn on an average 16s. 6d. per week. By 1818, this figure had fallen to 9s. per week and below. `[For the estimates see Hammond and Hammond, Skilled Labourer, 88 and 110; Bythell, Handloom Weavers, ch. 5.]`

Weaving was, moreover, often only a part-time job, both in the countryside and the towns. Urban workers turned to weaving when their own trade was depressed. Women and children also took to handloom weaving in order to supplement male earnings within the household. Power-looms were first attacked in Lancashire during the Luddite disturbances in 1812-13, despite the fact that this new technology only seriously threatened the weavers from the early 1820s. `[For the first instances of the destruction of power-looms in West Houghton in 1812, see Hammond and Hammond, Skilled Labourer, ch. 10. They were burnt down after other peaceful attempts by the weavers had failed.]` The principal causes for the distress of the weavers before the coming of the power-looms was a saturated labour market and declining wages.

Despite their sufferings, the number of weavers was actually increasing. Large numbers of demobilized soldiers and sailors were thrown on to the labour market at the end of the Napoleonic Wars. Many turned to handloom weaving, which was easily learned. They entered into competition with the old-established weavers at a time when government orders were drastically reduced and a general post-war slump was setting in. The depression did not drive surplus labour out of the trade, for there was a lack of alternatives. Moreover, handloom weaving was generally carried on at home and many weavers were reluctant to enter factories and submit to their discipline.

To understand the march of the Blanketeers, the chronological pattern of the various forms of collection actions has to be considered. This reveals that the march was a desperate resort after a sequence offailed alternative forms of protest (see Table 3.1).

TABLE 3.1. Chronology of events, 1808-1819

| Date | Event | Place |
|----|----|----|
| 1808 | petitioning/minimum wage | Lancashire |
| 1808 | weavers' strike | Lancashire |
| 1811-12 | petitioning/minimum wage | Lancashire |
| 1812 | weavers' strike | Lancashire |
| 1812 | Luddism | Lancashire, Nottinghamshire, Midlands |
| 1816, July | march of the unemployed miners | Staffordshire |
| 1816 | petitioning/minimum wage | Preston `[Read, Peterloo, 20.]` |
| 1816, Dec. | weavers' strike | Preston/Manchester `[Bythell, Handloom Weavers, 185, 193.]` |
| 1816 | Luddism | Lancashire |
| 1817, 8 Mar. | march of the Blanketeers | Manchester/Lancashire |
| 1817, 27 Mar. | Ardwick conspiracy | Manchester |
| 1817, 8 June | Huddersfield rising | Huddersfield |
| 1817, 8 June | Pentrich rising | Lancashire |
| 1818, Aug./Sept. | weavers' strike | (General Union of All Trades) |
| 1818, Aug./Sept | Philanthropic Society | Manchester/London |
| 1819, 16 Aug. | Peterloo | Manchester |

Since the late 1790s, the weavers had been pursuing the aim of a minimum wage. In 1800, Parliament passed the Cotton
Arbitration Act instead of a legal minimum wage. `[The Act provided that when a dispute arose between an employer and his weavers about piece rates, the parties could name an arbitrator. The decision of the arbitrator was binding and if the parties could not agree, the case was to be referred to a magistrate (Bythell, Hand/oom Weavers, 150).]` The working of the Act caused general dissatisfaction and an amendment in 1804 did not gain the consent of the parties concerned. A sharp decline in wages between 1805 and 1808 as well as high unemployment caused a new demand for a legal minimum wage, which was turned down by Parliament in 1808. A big strike followed. 'With no hope of legal protection', to quote Thompson, 'the weavers turned more directly towards the channels of political Radicalism.' `[Thompson, Making ofthe English Working Class, 307.]`

From 1808 onwards an intermittent sequence of protests followed. Periodically, a new form of protest was added without the old ones being deserted. Between 1811 and 1812 another attempt to obtain a minimum wage failed and a strike was followed by an outbreak of Luddism. The next stage came in 1816-17, when the failure of these three forms of protest led to the march of the Blanketeers and the Huddersfield and Pentridge risings.

According to Mitchell, the weavers resorted to the march because the 'government had rejected every legal means which they had hitherto acted upon. When you have asked for bread they have given you a stone.' `[TNA, HO 42/161, fos. 24-5.]` As can be seen from Table 3.1, the weavers continued to strive not only for a change in the political framework, either by peaceful reform or violent insurrection, but also for changes in their economic condition by strikes or Luddism.

The extent to which the weavers turned to radicalism is disputed among historians and differs according to their political leanings. Bythell, Stevenson, and others believe that there was no massive following for reform ideas in the Manchester area in 1816-17, and that the interest of the weavers in it was 'at best lukewarm and short-lived'. They attribute the weavers' turn to radicalism to the failure of the strike of 1818. `[Bythell, Handloom Weavers, 211-12.]` Thompson, on the other hand, dates the shift in attitude back to 1816-17. `[Thompson, Making of the English Working Class, 307.]` He interpreted the rapid spread of the reform clubs and frequent mass meetings in the industrial villages of the Midlands and the north as clear signs of the weavers' politicization. This was, however, only one amongst a number of means by which weavers expressed their discontent, even in 1816-17. In these two years, they burnt down several power-loom factories, for example, in Middleton and West Houghton, and also went on strike. `[Read, Peterloo, 96.]` Although the march was a novelty, Mitchell wished to keep it as much as possible within the bounds of legality. A few years later, when he published The Blanketeer and People's Guardian, a short-lived journal, he emphasized the 'honesty and legality of the plans of the Blanketeers'. `[The Blanketeer, and People's Guardian, no. 2, 30 Oct. 1919, 18-19.]` Even if the question of the extent to which they turned to political radicalism cannot be definitively settled, it is clear that the march of the Blanketeers was the outcome of various unsuccessful collective attempts to obtain relief. Although the march represented a new form of protest, it should not be regarded as a climax of social protest. It was just one of several peaks which culminated with the foundation of the Philanthropic Society, the first attempt at a national trade union, and the Peterloo massacre in 1818-19.

While workers in London could easily put pressure on the government, the working people of the Midlands and the north lived too far away. A march to the capital was, in that light, an effective means of creating publicity and bringing pressure to bear on Parliament. Even in the twentieth century the unemployed, who could at least count on the support of some sympathetic Members of Parliament, were convinced that their personal presence in the capital would give more force to their demands.

The march of the Blanketeers was planned to have a starshaped pattern, with contingents starting simultaneously from
various places and converging on Parliament at the same time.

This was not a new feature in 1817. Since the early eighteenth century, mass petitioning either of Parliament or the King by London's working people had often been accompanied by mass processions. `[Schulte Beerbiihl, Vom Gesellerwerein zur Gewerkschaft 255-60.]` The London silk weavers, coalheavers, and tailors, in particular, organized such petitioning processions. They sometimes took the traditional form of a funeral or a festive procession, but they could also take the more modern shape of a march that converged upon a single location from different directions. These petitioning processions were well organized and mostly peaceful. In the case of the London silk weavers, marches peaked in the 1760s and early 1770s before the passing of the Spitalfields Act (1773). The convergent marches were part of a strike tactic, not a hunger protest.

The march of 1817 marked a further stage in the development of new protest patterns by the working classes after the end of the Napoleonic Wars. `[Prentice spoke of the march as an 'invention of a rather unusual mode of exercising the constitutional right of petition'. Prentice, Historical Sketches, 92.]` The Blanketeers were probably not the first unemployed marchers. The unemployed colliers of the Midlands were also severely hit by the post-war depression and according to Thompson the unemployed Staffordshire miners were the first to attempt what he calls a 'hunger march' inJuly 1816. `[Not much is known about the organization of their march. Those colliers who reached the outskirts of London in July 1816 were given money and food to return home. Thompson, Making of the English Working Class, 712; H. W. C. Davis, 'Lancashire Reformers, 1816-17',Bulletin of the John Rylands Library, 10 (1926), 47-79, at 50; Stevenson, Popular Disturbances, 207.]` However, it is not clear whether the miners' march was actually a march of the unemployed. Bagguley perceived the idea of a march from Lancashire to London as entirely novel. `['[T] here never was such a thing done before if you look through all the annals of History'. Bagguley, 10 Mar. 1817, TNA, HO 40/5, fos. 43-4.]` Certainly the geographical dimension of the planned march was new. For the first time it was no longer a local or metropolitan affair but a regional one. Also new was the fact that it was a march to alleviate the plight of those without work. Unemployed protest marches to the capital as a general tactic have several structural weaknesses: dependence on public support and sympathy, and on the goodwill of the authorities not to disperse them. The latter condition was not fulfilled in 1817. Thoroughly alarmed by the Spa Fields riots in London in December 1816 and the attack on the Prince Regent, Parliament suspended the Habeas Corpus Act and passed the Six Gagging Acts shortly before the Blanketeers set out on their march.

The local authorities had been informed by spies about the intention of the Blanketeers from their very first meetings in February 1816. In addition to remarks on the insurrectionary ideas of the participants at the preparatory meetings, the informers also reported on the peaceful intentions of the march. `[TNA, HO 42/172, fos. 58-60.]` What alarmed the authorities was the possible size and character of the march, and the unpredictable outcome of mass movements. Moreover, the dominant classes were either unable or unwilling to distinguish between various forms of protest. Even those who regarded the Blanketeers as misled rather than revolutionaries thought it necessary to intercept the march at the very beginning, given the general unrest and discontent in the country. Among the latter was William Hulton, the chairman of the Manchester magistrates.

He referred to the marchers as 'wandering petitioners' or 'knapsack travellers'. `[TNA, HO 40/10, fos. 104-5.]`

Thirdly, to understand the failure of the Blanketeers it is also important to scrutinize the march leaders. The hunger marchers of the 1920s and 1930s had staunch leaders in people such as Wal Hannington and Harry MacShane. Working-class radicalism of the years after the Napoleonic Wars did not have a strong national leadership, and this was certainly true of the Blanketeers. `[Thompson, Making ofthe English Working Class, 6g1, 833.]` The radicals were divided between constitutionalists and revolutionaries. William Cobbett and Major Cartwright were the leading representatives of the reform movement of those years. They rejected physical force and believed that machine-breaking and riots would only provoke government repression. Cobbett had urged the working people to abandon violence and see the political system as the primary cause of their distress. The more radical section, the Spenceans, on the other hand, adhered to more violent methods.

The members of the Society of Spencean Philanthropists had formulated a wild plan to seize the Tower and the Bank of England and to overthrow the government. `[Aspinall, Early English Trade Unions, 129-30.]`

Cobbett did not turn towards the working classes before the end of the wars, but since the publication of *Two Penny Trash* and the *Address to the Journeymen and Labourers* his influence on the working people had been growing rapidly. He was, however, not inclined to take up the role of a nationalleader, `[Thompson, Making of the English Working Class, 665-7.]` and his flight to America in 1817 demoralized popular radicalism. Cobbett is also believed to have had a hand in the early preparations of the march, but had left England before the Blanketeers set off on their journey. Samuel Bamford had similarly declined to participate in it. `[Chaloner (ed.), The Autobiography of Samuel Bamford, 30-1. He feared that a march of this sort might do the working people's cause more harm than good. For Cobbett's and Cartwright's involvement see Prentice, Historical Sketches, 93-4.]` Thus the leadership was left to the more radical wing of the reformers, among them Joseph Mitchell, William Benbow, Drummond, and Bagguley. This group had come under the influence of the more radical Spenceans. `[Chaloner (ed.), The Autobiography of Samuel Bamford, 31.]` The latter also did not support the march wholeheartedly, for the hunger protest did not fit precisely into their plans. Some of the radicals, such as Joseph Johnston, John Saxton, and John Knight even discouraged their followers from being drawn in. `[See Prentice's conviction that the march 'was the least likely to convince the middle and the aristocratic classes that the multitudes were fitted for the enjoyment of the electoral franchise'. Prentice, Historical Sketches, 94.]` Samuel Benbow, who had been actively involved in the preparations at Middleton, did not appear at the meeting at St Peter's Field, where Drummond and Bagguley, two young radicals, were the principal orators. They were arrested before the weavers had set out on their march. There is no evidence of Joseph Mitchell's presence at the march. The marchers were therefore left more or less without leadership, which caused confusion and led to their early dispersal. The absence of leadership made repression easy for the authorities, and the cavalry under General Byng dispersed the marchers with a minimum of violence. `[Read, Peterloo, 100-1.]`

Miscalculation of public support and marchers' hardships contributed to this early debacle. The hunger marchers of the interwar period could rely on a national network of local committees of the NUWM, trade unions, and other self-help organizations for support on their way to London. In 1816 trade clubs and friendly societies were spread all over the country, but there was not yet a national federation. Communication between them was irregular and accidental, and the leaders of the Blanketeers had not contacted the local clubs and societies on the route to London for support. The speeches of Bagguley and others reveal that they were not blind to the difficulties. They did, indeed, warn the participants that the journey would not be easy and that they would have to cope with difficulties. They advised them to take some money with them if they had any to spare, and to take a blanket because 'your numbers will exceed any accommodation on the road'. Bagguley also suggested that they take provisions for three days. `[TNA, HO 40/10, fo. 101.]` Nevertheless they underestimated the difficulties and overestimated the volume of public support. They were convinced that when the marchers showed themselves 'you will not want friends to support you and I haven't doubt you will meet many friends on the road, farmers and others who will assist you'. `[TNA, HO 40/5/7, fos. 49, 53.]` Interrogations of imprisoned marchers reveal that they were prepared to sleep under hedges and bridges. Some had small sums of money with them, and others found friends who lodged them, but in general they underestimated the hardships and the inclemency of the weather. `[TNA, HO 33/4, fos. 188r-w.]`

Conclusion

Several factors contributed to the failure of the Blanketeers' march of 1817. Early nineteenth-century society had not yet accepted the legitimacy of popular protests and consequently had not developed adequate democratic means for accepting and dealing with them. The Blanketeers lived at a time when trade unions were still illegal and any social and economic protest by the lower classes was regarded as a threat to society, irrespective of the legality of means they employed. In 1816-17 Britain had just won a war against revolutionary France. While abroad the threat of revolution was banished, the country itself seemed to have become more inflamed. Whether Britain was on the verge of a revolution or not, leading politicians in Britain believed that there was a threat and tried to suppress the protest of working people. `[At the forefront of them was Viscount Sidmouth, the Home Secretary, who became the famous victim of the infamous Oliver the Spy. Sidmouth took action against the alleged revolutionaries on the strength of Oliver's reports. In the days before an efficient police force, the government made extensive use of spies to discover revolutionary plots. Oliver the Spy was directly employed by Lord Sidmouth. These spies or agents provocateurs often hatched rather than revealed plots, and Oliver the Spy was the most notorious of those who were exposed.]`

Workers' organizations were still in their infancy. Many were short-lived, of a local or regional character, and mainly restricted to the skilled workers. British working people still had a long way to go, not only in organizing unskilled workers but also in taking the unemployed into account. The march of the unemployed was a new instrument for bringing pressure to bear on the ruling classes, and recourse was taken to it only after other methods of obtaining relief had failed.

The general prospects for a successful march were evidently poor in the early spring of 1817. The decision was taken at a time when the authorities were thoroughly alarmed and feared insurrection. Unlike their twentieth-century successors, the Blanketeers lacked an effective leadership. The leaders had either deserted or were arrested before the weavers had actually started on their journey. On the whole, the march of the Blanketeers was a premature event which took place at an unfavourable moment.

```
