## October / November 1817



Pentrich trial

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000174/18170927/007/0002

Morning Post
Saturday 27 September 1817

p2

TRIALS FOR HIGH TREASON.

Derby, Sept. 23. — The Special Commission, for the trial of the Prisoners against whom true bills for High Treason had been found at the last Assize, is to be opened here on Thursday next. The greater part of the Prisoners are in the county gaol in this town. The rest, who could not be accommodated here, are in the gaol at Nottingham. They are to be marched to this town to be arraigned with the other Prisoners, and then to be sent back again till their day of trial come. The Prisoners in this town are —

Thomas Rattison, Josiah Gadber, Samuel Hunt, John Hill, Alexander Johnson, Samuel Ludlam, William Ludlam, John Moor, Josiah MacKessick, Joseph Turner, Edward Turner, Josiah Thorp, William Turner, Robert Turner, Joseph Weightman, James Wightman, George Wightman, William Wightman, Thomas Wightman, Jeremiah Brundreth *(sic)* (charged with having fired the fatal shot), Isaac Ludlam, Thomas Bacon, John Bacon, and the three following who have been admitted King's evidence - George Burrows, John Fletcher, and Thomas Turner: in all twenty-six Prisoners are in the County gaol upon this charge.

In Nottingham gaol are fifteen Prisoners upon the same charge, viz.:—

Edward Moore, William Adams, William Hardwicke, Jerman Buxton, Joseph Topham, Joseph Hall, Thomas Ensor, Nathaniel Jennings, Joseph Savage, John Wright, John Onion, Geo. Brassington, Isaac Ludlam, Chas. Swain, and Dan. Hunt.

The County Hall is fitted up with a temporary bench and seats for the trial. The Hall is a large building fronting towards the south. Its ordinary interior arrangement is thus:— If you suppose the floor divided into two equal parallelograms, the front one is an empty pavement, occupied during the Assizes by the crowd; the back parallelogram is laid out in three equal parts — for the Crown Court to your right as you enter the Hall; the *Nisi Prius* to your left; and an inclosed place for the Grand Jury and their witnesses in the middle; to which is attached a narrow gallery towards each Court. The unoccupied parallelogram, and the Crown Court, are now formed into one extensive and commodious Court for the ensuing trials in this manner:— The bench is at the extremity of the pavement to the right. Immediately in front is a very large table for the accommodation of Counsel and Attorneys. A number of seats are next placed for the reception of the numerous prisoners. Two-thirds are thus occupied; the remaining third is occupied with seats rising in regular gradation, for the convenience of spectators. To the right of the Bench is the Jury-box, and occupies the seats assigned for prisoners in the Crown Court; the remaining part, comprehending the former Bench, Bar, and Jury-box, fitted up for spectators. The Grand Jury-gallery, too, commands a full view of the new Bench and Bar.

Mr. Denman is engaged as Counsel for the Prisoners.



---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001057/18171003/004/0001
Saunders's News-Letter
Friday 03 October 1817
p1

TRIALS FOR TREASON. DERBY, FRIDAY, SEPT. 20.

At eight o'clock this morning twelve prisoners came in from Nottingham, on the top of coach, all chained together. They seemed in excellent spirits, making their remarks to one another, and laughing as they passed along.

A few minutes past nine, Mr. Loundes, the Clerk of the Arraigns, took his place in Court: a short time afterwards the Attorney General entered, and seated himself on his right hand. Mr. Loundes directed that their Lordships should be informed the Attorney-General was in Court; at that instant Mr. Justice Holroyd and Mr Justice Abbott took their seats on the Bench; Mr. Clarke took his place at the same time on the Attorney-General's right hand; Mr. Balguy sat next.

Mr. Justice Abbott (addressing the Nottingham gaoler)—"Gaoler, you have prisoners here; bring them forward."

The 12 men from Nottingham were then led from a cell immediately behind the Bench to the seat prepared opposite the Jury-box. The Clerk read their names:— Isaac Ludlam the younger, Charles Swaine, John Onion, Joseph Topham, German Buxton, Edward Moore, George Brassington, William Adams, William Hardwicke, John Wright, Thomas Ensor, and Joseph Savage.

Mr. Justice Abbott (repeating the names of the prisoners)—" The Grand Jury this county having, at the last Assizes here, found true bills for high treason against you, you are indicted upon that charge, and to lake your trial on the 15th or 16th of October next. You had better be prepared for the 15th. Have you any solicitors employed for your defence?"

Mr. Robert Bond, of Leicester, stood up at the end of the table, and said that Mr. Thomas Ragg, of Belper, in this county, and himself, were Solicitors for these and all the other Prisoners.

Mr. Justice Abbott—"Prisoners, you say these Gentlemen are your Solicitors. An order shall be made to secure to them access to you at all reasonable hours. Have you given instructions as to any Gendemen at the Bar to be Counsel for you?"

Mr. Bond— "These and all the other Prisoners wish for Mr. John Cross and Mr. Thomas Denman to be their Counsel."

Mr. Justice Abbott— "These Gentlemen shall be assigned by the Court for your Counsel, and an order made that they may have access to you at all reasonable hours."

The Prisoners were then withdrawn.

Mr. Justice Abbott—— "After consulting with the gaoler here (Mr. Eaton), and with the physician (Dr. Fox), I find it would be neither convenient nor advisable to put these Prisoners into the gaol here. It is better, for their own sake, that they taken back again to Nottingham."

After a considerable interval, the following Prisoners were led to the bar through the Court: "Thomas Bacon (an aged man, charged to have planned the alledged insurrection,) Jeremiah Brandreth (designated the Nottingham Captain, little, thin, old man). Joseph Wightman (an uncommonly stout and good-looking young man,) William Turner (a young man, but rather disfigured by enormous black beard, apparently the growth of several months), Isaac Ludlam the elder, William Ludlam, and Samuel Hunt.

Mr. Justice Abbott addressed them in precisely the same terms he had addressed the others.

Edward Turner, Robert Turner, John McKessick, John Hill, Joseph Rawson (alias Thorp,) John Moore, William Wightman, and Thomas Wightman, were next brought up, and disposed at in like manner.

The last party were Jos. Wightman, Js. Wightman, Thos. Bettison (very young and good-looking lads), Alexander Johnson, John Bacon, and Josiah Godber (the two last rather old men.)

Joseph Turner and Samuel Ludlam were so sick that they could not brought into court; the gaoler was, therefore, instructed to communicate to them the appointment of solicitors and counsel, and the day of their trials.

Thus 35 persons altogether are to take their trials here on the 15th of October, upon a charge of high treason. All are evidently the lowest and labouring class of the community; many of them appeared in Court in their blue smock-frocks.

Mr. Attorney-General— "I have a motion to submit to the Court, that Mr. Henry Litchfield, the Solicitor for the prosecution, instructed to deliver to the prisoners a list the Jurors, their professions, and places of residence, at the same time with the indictment. Your Lordships may recollect a similar order by the Court of King's Bench at the trial of Watson."

Mr. Justice Abbott— "An order shall be made to that effect."

The Court adjourned at half past ten, to Wednesday, the 15th of October, at twelve o'clock.


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001316/18171006/012/0004
Evening Mail

Monday 06 October 1817
p4

[INDICTMENT]

Our paper of this day contains an important document at this time, namely, the Bill of Indictment against the Derbyshire rioters; of which, to save those who may not be disposed carry their attention through the dry technicalities of such an instrument, we shall subjoin as an abstract. It may here suffice to say, therefore, that the indictment contains three counts, founded upon two different statutes. The first count, which our readers will observe is for a substantive act of treason, in directly levying war against the King, is upon the long, if not far-famed statute of 25th Edw. III. The second count, which is for conspiring to depose the King, is to proved by a series overt acts five in number, and founded upon the 36th of George III. And the third count, for conspiring to levy war against the King, in order to compel him by force change his measures, made out by the same overt acts, is founded upon the same statute as the preceding. It will be observed, that the whole number rioters estimated at 500. Those who peruse the indictment itself might institute comparison between its formal language and the light narrative and rhetorical flourishes of a similar document for a similar offence in the Court of Assize at paris, contained in our paper of Friday.

THE INDICTMENT.

1st Count.—Charges that the prisoners, on divers days, between the 9th and 15th June, at the parish of South Wingfield, in the county of Derby, with a multitude false traitors, whose names are unknown, the number of 500 and more, arrayed, and armed in warlike manner, (Court), with swords, pistols, clubs, bludgeons, and other weapons, being assembled and gathered together, wickedly, maliciously, and traitorously, did levy and make war against our Lord the King within this realm, and being assembled together, arrayed and armed against our said Lord the King, did with great force and violence parade and march in hostile manner and through divers villages, places, and public highways, and maliciously and traitorously attempt and endeavour, by force and arms, to subvert and destroy the Government and Constitution of this realm by law established.

2nd Count.— Charges that the prisoners, with divers other false traitors, did compass, imagine, invent, devise, and intend to deprive and depose our said Lord the King, of and from the style, honour, and kingly name of the Imperial Crown this realm.

1st Overt Act.— Maliciously and traitorously assembling, meeting, conspiring, and consulting to devise, arrange, and mature plans and means to subvert and destroy the Constitution and Government of this realm by law established.

2nd Overt Act.— Maliciously and traitorously assembling, meeting, conspiring, consulting, and agreeing to stir up, raise, make, and levy, insurrection.rebellion, and war against our said Lord the King, within this realm; and to subvert and destroy the Constitution, &c.

3rd Overt Act.—Maliciously and traitorously purchasing, procuring, providing, and having large quantities of swords, pikes, guns, and pistols, and of gunpowder, leaden bullets, and slugs, with intent thereby to arm and array themselves and others, in order to attack, fight with, kill, and destroy the soldiers, troops, and forces of our Lord the King, and other his faithful subjects; and to raise, make, and levy insurrection, rebellion, and war against the King, and to subvert and destroy the Constitution, &c.

4th Overt Act.- Maliciously and traitorously assembling with 500 others, with swords, guns, pistols, &c. and parading and marching with great noise and violence, in, through and along divers public highways, villages, and places, and attacking and besetting the houses and habitations divers liege subjects, and seizing and taking guns, pistols, and other offensive weapons, with intent to arm themselves and others, in order attack the soldiers, to levy war, and to subvert the Constitution.

5th Overt Act.—Levying and making public war against our said Lord the King within this realm.

3d Count.—For compassing, imagining, inventing, devising, and intending to levy war against our said Lord the King within this realm, in order, by force and constraint, to compel him to change his measures and counsels.

The overt acts in this count are the same as in the second count.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000174/18171027/004/0004
Morning Post - Monday 27 October 1817
p1-4

sentencing etc p4

At ten o'clock the other prisoners were ordered to be again placed at the bar. Those who had just pleaded guilty were first brought in; Jeremiah Brandreth, William Turner, Isaac Ludlum, and George Weightman, came at last into Court. They were in irons.

Mr. Lowndes addressed Brandreth in the form usual on such occasions:— "Jeremiah Brandreth, you stand convicted of high treason; have you any thing to say why sentence of death should not be passed on you?"

Brandreth in a very low tone addressed a few words to their Lordships, in which he expressed a hope that mercy would be shown to him.

W. Turner uttered a few words to the same effect, in reply to the foregoing question.

Isaac Ludlam said— "May it please your Lordships to show mercy. I hope your Lordships will. If I may be spared, my life shall hereafter be in such conformity with the laws of God and man, that no one shall repent that my prayer was attended to." While speaking, he was greatly agitated.

George Weightman said nothing.

Several of those who had pleaded "Guilty," implored their Lordships to shew mercy.

This ceremony concluded, the last awful business of the day commenced, and

The Chief Baron spoke as follows:— Prisoners at the bar— To see so many persons, and especially so many young men in the miserable condition in which you now stand, is to me most painful, and is an exhibition as mournful and afflicting, as, thank God! in this country it is uncommon. But it is most satisfactory to the public to know, and it must he some consolation to yourselves to remember, that you have had every assistance and advantage that any man in any situation could desire, to enable him to meet charges brought against him. You have been defended by Counsel of your own selection, who, without the least interruption from any quarter, have used every exertion in your favour, which their experience, knowledge, and great abilities could suggest. I of course am now speaking to those who persisted in their pleas of 'Not Guilty' till their verdicts were returned. You were tried by several Juries of your countrymen, of as great respectability, as patient and as attentive to the business before them, as ever sat in a British Court of Justice. During the whole of the investigation which has taken place on this solemn and important occasion, the greatest attention has been paid to every thing that could be urged on the part of the defence. Those Juries, compelled by the force of irresistible evidence, have found you guilty, and of high treason. To those among you who have not been tried, but who have desired to withdraw your plea of Not Guilty, I now address myself.— You who have acted thus, know that your cases were decided in the others who have been tried. You are conscious of your guilt, and having obtained leave to withdraw your former plea have now pleaded Guilty. You, therefore, all of you now stand before the world guilty of higb treason; the highest, the greatest offence known to the law. It is, indeed, an offence which may be said to include as it leads to the commission of every other species of crime. Your insurrection, I thank God, did not last long, but while it did last, it was marked by violences, and by the murder of a young man, who, it appears, did not offend you by attempting to offer you the least opposition. This shews the ferocity of your purpose, and proves that it was your object to wade through the blood of your fellow citizens, to overthrow the law and constitution of your country; to sacrifice the lives, the property, and the liberties of all who opposed your designs, which, if successful, would have introduced a state of the most complete anarchy. God be praised, your insurrections failed. I will not dwell longer on this subject; but I may be allowed to say it is my hope, and my expectation, that the examples you will furnish on this important day, may keep others from yielding to the delusions which frantic and rebellions spirits may spend abroad. I hope your fate will save others from becoming the instruments of hellish agitators, if any remains behind, whose rapacity and wickedness would for purposes of their own, urge unhappy men to courses which mast lead them to ruin. Let me beseech you to remember your present situation. Your lives are forfeited to the laws of your country. Make the most of the small remnant of that life which remains to you; endeavour to make some compensation to that society you have so much injured, and pray to God for grace. I have no more to say , but to repeat my sincere wish that your mournful example may prove a great blessing to others; that the advice given to you by that excellent man, Mr. Goodwin, may not be forgotten — and that it may be every where felt, "that the law is too strong for rebels, and that they march with halters about their neck."I hope others will take warning by your present unhappy condition, and by avoiding your crimes avoid your dreadful fate. I now hasten,— for I cannot trust myself to say more on the subject,— to pronounce the awful sentence of the law, which is, "That you and each of you be taken to the gaol from whence you have been brought, and thence carried on a hurdle to the place of execution, and there severally hanged by the neck till you be dead, and afterwards your heads to be severed from your bodies, and your bodies divided into four quarters, and placed at his Majesty's disposal;— and,— may the Lord God of all Mercy have compassion upon you!"

Profound silence reigned in the hall, while the terrible sentence awarded by the law against traitors was pronounced. The Prisoners were deeply affected, but spoke not, with the exception of Isaac Ludlam, who renewed his supplication for mercy. The gaoler made him understand that he could not then address the Court, and he retired with his fellow-prisoners, in the agonies of despair. Weightman was much paler than when on his trial. W. Turner was extremely dejected, but apparently resigned; and the same may be said of Brandreth. The greatest change of department was seen in the conduct of Ludlam, who had lost all his former serenity; and during the few moments the Court sat after he had been removed, his frantic sorrow was more than once heard in the hall.

Before the Court adjourned, the Chief Baron felt it to be his duty for himself, and he believed he might say for the Learned Judges near him, to tender his thanks to the Juries. He might venture to say, he had never met with Jurors who possessed stronger claims on his respect and gratitude.

The Court was then adjourned, and the prisoners were shortly afterwards conveyed through an unusually large assembly of spectators to the prison, being escorted thither by a strong body of constables and javelin-men. The crowd in the Hall had been very great through the whole of the morning. No expressions either of satisfaction or displeasure escaped the multitude out of doors.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000398/18171029/006/0004

Hereford Journal
Wednesday 29 October 1817

p4

The State Trials Derby still continue, and another man has been convicted —William Turner, whose trial succeeded that of Brandreth, the Nottingham Captain, has been found guilty of high treason, having been implicated in the proceedings, as second in command to Brandreth. Turner is a tall, elderly man. He appeared much dejected when in Court, and attended with an air of anxious grief to the evidence given by the witnesses, whose testimony seemed of most importance. –Brandreth was on Sunday afternoon visited by the Chaplain of the Gaol, to whose religious admonitions he was extremely attentive. His conduct, since his conviction, has been decorous and correct has a wife and three children: to his wife (who is now pregnant), he has written very proper letter, entreating her to bring up the children in the paths of religion. Brandreth professes be a Baptist.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000230/18171103/005/0002
Hampshire Chronicle

Monday 03 November 1817

p2
STATE TRIALS.

In our last publication we briefly announced the termination of the proceedings against the prisoners arraigned for High Treason Derby. To publish the whole of the trials would much exceed our limits; we shall, however, abstract some the evidence adduced against Brandreth, which will be sufficient to enable our readers to form an idea of the nature of the charges preferred against the whole of the prisoners, and the dangerous and alarming extent of their atrocities, which in the above instance was stained with the murder of an innocent individual. Jeremiah Brandreth was the first prisoner brought to the bar; and after the preliminary proceedings and the opening speech of the Attorney General, several witnesses were examined, among whom was—

Thomas Turner, who deposed, that he was apprehended consequence of the insurrection at South Wingfield, and has been in custody ever since. He lived at South Wingfield with his father, who is a frame work knitter; left his father's house on the evening of they 9th of June, and went in company with Samuel Ludlam and John Walker,to a meeting-house, close to Colonel Horton's gate; saw there William Turner, George Weightman, and a stranger, whom he afterwards found to be the Nottingham Captain, and whom he then saw at the bar. The three latter had guns, and were proceeding to Hunt's farm through a field of Col. Horton's; on their way thither, William Turner was loading a gun with a bullet; George Weightman said, come lads, I expect engagement very soon with Jessop's men at Butterley's Works. Witness asked William Turner who the stranger was? and his answer was, "that's our Captain from Nottingham." When they got to Hunt's farm, witness and Samuel Ludlam stopped at about 100 yards from the barn. There were a score or more persons assembled. Shortly afterwards several of these persons came towards witness, and he saw that they had weapons, some pikes and guns, and one or two had swords. Prisoner, Turner, and Weightman came with the others from the barn.— Heard George Weightman say that he must go, to find whether Mr. Topham and the Pentridge people were coming to meet the party there. William Turner and prisoner formed the people into ranks, and prisoner had a bag of bullets, which he received from George Bromley. Prisoner ordered the party march. The first house which they went to was that of Mr. Hardwick. Part of the party went up to that house, but witness did not go. He went to Henry Thomlinson's, and from thence to Topham's close, where he was joined by Isaac Ludlam the elder, and Isaac Ludlam the younger, and William Ludlam, each of whom had a pike in his hand. (Some pikes were here shewn the witness, which he recognised.)— Each appeared about eight feet long, including the spike. Weightman took the bag of bullets from witness. The party proceeded to the house of Elijah Hall, Turner and prisoner commanded all the way. When they got to Hall's door they found him outside the door, which was fastened. Prisoner asked Hall for his guns, which the latter was evidently unwilling to give, but after some dispute a gun was handed out of one of the windows by Hall's desire. Prisoner got the gun, but said that he knew Hall had more arms in the house, and that they must be given up to him. Hall declared that he had no more arms, but prisoner asserted that he had, threatening that if they were not immediately given up, the door should broken open; Prisoner struck Hall upon the face, and presenting a gun at him, declared that if he (Hall) did not find out more arms, he (the prisoner) would shoot him. Witness laid hold of prisoner, telling him that he should not so ill treat Hall, who had not, he believed, any more arms in his possession. Prisoner took a candle and went up stairs to search for arms, but he found none; he, however, brought down Hall's son, who it was evident unwillingly accompanied him. Prisoner had taken him out of bed, and insisted that he must go with the party. Prisoner first demanded that the elder Hall should go with him, which the latter refused. Young Hall was however taken with the party, who next proceeded to the house of Isaac Walker, from which house they took a brass barrelled pistol, which prisoner put into an apron that he had tied round him like a belt. From Walker's they proceeded to the house of Henry Bastwick, in which a window was broken. They next went to Samuel Hunt's, where they got bread and cheese; Hunt told them to eat what they liked, stating that he would dress himself and go with them. They accordingly took bread and cheese and beer with Turner, who was a farmer. After stopping there about a quarter of an hour or 20 minutes, they left Hunt's house, and Hunt himself went with them. The Turners and Ludlams were armed as well as the prisoner. From Hunt's they proceeded the house of Mrs. Hepworth; when witness reached her house he found prisoner rattling at the door, and calling for arms. The door was not opened, and prisoner called for some one to break it open. Samuel Hunt took a stone from the coping of a wall, and flung it at the door, but that did not force it open; prisoner went from the door to a little window at the back of the house, and asked those whom he saw within to send out arms, and to open the door; those within did neither, and prisoner fired in—witness could not say whether with gun or pistol; witness on hearing the shot, went the window, and saw a man lying on the floor of the kitchen. This man witness heard was Robert Walker, the servant of Mrs. Hepworth, who was killed by the prisoner's shot. Witness told prisoner that he should not have shot the poor innocent man; and prisoner said, that it was his duty to do so, adding, that if witness said any more about it he would blow his brains out. They then proceeded to other houses. At Eastwood some of the party dropped off. Witness himself, as well as others, quitted them. Prisoner and William Turner were marching at the head of the party. Before witness left the party, he saw William Hone attempting to turn back, and prisoner seeing Hone attempt also, raised his gun (for prisoner carried a gun in his hand, as well as a pistol in his apron), threatening Hone, that he did not immediately return to the party, he would fire at him. Prisoner presented his gun at Hone, but witness and William Turner prevented him from firing. Hone did,however, return to the party; Bromley brought him back.

Mary Hepworth examined.— I am a widow and live South Wingfield Park. On the night of the 9th of June last, I had at home one son, three daughters,two men servants, and myself. About half past eleven we were disturbed by a thundering at the door and men's voices, demanding our men and arms. We got and called out they should not be opened, and that we could not part with our men or guns. We told them to go away, but they attacked the windows both sides of the house. The kitchen window at the back of the house was broken by the shutters being forced into the middle of the room, and the glasses broke out. At that time I and a daughter and my son and two men servants were in the kitchen. The servants names were R. Vaux and R. Walters. They said to my son William, we must have your guns and your men, or we will blow your brains out. Immediately after the window was broken, somebody fired in, and R. Walters was shot. He died soon after the wound was received. He had been sitting down opposite the window, putting on his boots. The shot struck him in the neck. They kept demanding the guns and the men; and I thought it was William that was shot, and said the guns must be delivered, or we shall be murdered. The guns that were concealed in the cellar, were then fetched, and delivered to them out of the window. Then they said, we must have your men. I went up stairs and told them out of the window, that they could not have any men, as one was shot; and they said that they would serve me the same, if I did not open the door. They, however, went away then. On examining outside, I found several stones and a pike, with which the door seemed have been bored.

G. Goodwin examined by Mr. Gurney.— I am one of the Managers of Butterley Iron Works. Before Monday the 8th of June, we had many of our men sworn special constables, for the purpose of suppressing the insurrection that was expected every day. The neighbourhood was in a very disturbed state. On the night in question we had assembled our men, to the amount of nearly 100, and kept them together all night at Ripley. In the course of the night we heard shots fired, horns blowing, and shouts in the neighbouring villages. We were apprehensive of our works being attacked. When daylight came we dispersed, supposing the insurrection would not take place. Soon after, on looking down the road from Pentridge to Butterley, we saw about 100 men approaching us. They were drawn up in a regular line. They were armed with guns, pikes, and spears, and a very few had no arms. Upon this orders were given for the men to retire into the office of the iron-works to defend it. They had the prisoner at the head as Captain. When they got to the foundery gates, the prisoner ordered them to halt! to the right face, front! He had a gun in his hand, and a pistol stuck in kind of belt, like an apron, twisted round him. The men then extended in a curved line opposite us. We were inclosed by them. The prisoner knocked at the gates with the butt of his gun. I was in front, and said, What do you want —what is your object here? He said, we want your men. I said, you shall not have one of them—you are too many already— unless you are going for a better purpose, disperse; depend on it the laws will be too strong for you— you are going with halters round your necks, and you will all be hanged. The prisoner made no reply. I then observed I. Ludlam, armed with a pike, and J. Taylor armed with a gun. I accosted I. Ludlam, and said, Good God, Isaac, what are you about on such an errand as this? you have got a halter about your neck go home. I took him by the shoulder, and strove to push him into the office; but he seemed much agitated, said, I am as bad as I can be, and I must go on.— He might have been sheltered in our office, but would not. S. Booth's servant and two others took advantage of my offer, came in, and we protected them. Some time afterwards I saw W. Weightman on horseback, going towards Nottingham, but not the way the others went. I seized the horse's bridle, and accused him of going to join the rebels. At last he owned he was, and said, if would let him go, he would go home; but as I saw a bag under him, I seized the horse's head again, and said, you rascal, I will have that bag; it contains bullets, and you are taking them to the rebels. I pulled him off his horse, and he said he would give them quietly. There were in the bag bullets, also a stocking full, apparently of a different bore.

At nine o'clock on Saturday, their Lordships having taken their seats on the Bench, T. Bacon, Bacon, S. Hunt, J. Turner, E. Turner. J. Mackessick, German Buxton, and J. Godber, were put to the bar.— Mr. Denman then humbly moved their Lordships that, these prisoners might be allowed to withdraw their plea of not Guilty, and plead Guilty. The Attorney General assented to the proposition. After these prisoners were conducted from the bar, J.Moone, E. Moone, C Swaine, J. Hill, J. Rawson G. Brassington, W. Handwicke, W. Weightman. A. Johnson, and T. Bettison, were placed the bar. Mr, Denman made similar motion with respect to these, which was similarly disposed of. I. Ludlam jun. S. Ludlam, W. Ludlam, R. Turner, J. Weightman,jun. T. Weightman, W. Adams, J. Wright, T. Topham, T T. Lensor, and J. Savage were next put to the bar. A Jury was then called, and went into the box. Mr. Lowndes read over an abstract of the indictment to them, and the Attorney General then rose and spoke as follows .

"Gentlemen, —It will be some relief to your minds on the present occasion, for me to tell you in the outset of what I address to you, that no evidence will be offered against the persons at the bar. It has been most truly said by a most able writer on the Criminal Law, that one of the ends and final causes of human punishment is to deter others by example from the commission of similar crimes. I think I state the very words of Mr. Justice Blackstone, for no words of my own could adequately express the opinion of so great and elegant a writer. When many persons have committed a crime of a public nature, it is absolutely necessary to bring some, and often many, to the bar of public justice; but when that time arrives, when we suppose and hope there have been sufficient examples made, nothing is so gratifying to sheath the sword of Justice, and hold out the shield of mercy. You observe, Gentlemen, among the persons at the bar, many of them are very young. From what has appeared in evidence, and from the names of many of them, we have ascertained that they are connected by the ties of relationship to others who have been most deeply implicated in this business. Some are the nephews, and some the children of those who have been the most active. I am willing to suppose, that without that due consideration which they ought to have paid, they have been induced to follow the bad example of others; and I hope that they will look up to this day as an example in future. It is for that example that I have brought them before you, and not for the purpose of offering evidence against them; hoping and trusting, that so far from the course having any improper effect, it may restore them back in quietness the bosoms of their families, who have had for them an affection and regard; and that being so restored, they may profit by the example which this proceeding affords them; and looking at the dangerous and frightful situation in which they have so recently been, they will become honest, sober, industrious, and religious men and that they may by that honesty and integrity, fill with propriety the stations of life to which it has pleased God to call them. If hereafter I should hear that they have done that—that they have become valuable members of society, and that (should it please God to prolong their lives) they advance, and go on a good example to others—if I hear that, say, it will afford me the greatest possible gratification that I could receive. Throughout these proceedings, Gentlemen, I have endeavoured to perform my duty, as well as my poor talents would allow me, and I trust with justice to all. I hope, and am willing to believe, that the step I am at present taking, will have the good effect I wish; perhaps I may be supposed to be in error; but it is the result of my most serious deliberation."

Lord Chief Baron. "Gentlemen, his Majesty's Attorney-General having declined offering any evidence against the unfortunate prisoners at the bar, your duty is only to find them not guilty."

The foreman pronounced a verdict according to the direction of the Learned Judge, who addressed the prisoners in a most impressive manner. Mr. Denman now rose, evidently much affected, and in a few words expressed his hope with respect to the young men at bar, in coincidence with the sentiments the Attorney-General. So surprised were these unfortunate men, that they stood motionless the bar for short time, and were much affected.— Those prisoners who had pleaded guilty were now conducted into Court. After them came Brandreth, Isaac Ludlam the elder, William Turner, and George Weightman, whose appearance was announced by the clanking of the irons, which echoed through the silent Hall in a horrid manner. All of them begged for mercy on being asked what they had to say why judgment to die according to law should not be passed. The Chief Baron then addressed them:

"Prisoners at the bar, —In the unhappy situation in which you now stand, it becomes my duty to pass upon you the sentence of the law, which you have incurred by the violation of the laws of your country. It must be some consolation to you, however, that you have had every assistance and every advantage, that men in your situation could have. You have been defended by Counsel of your own selection, who, without any interruption from any quarter, used every exertion your favour which their experience, their learning, and their great abilities suggested to them. I am speaking of those among you who pleaded not guilty. You were tried by several Juries, whose respectability was undoubted. During the whole of the investigation on this most important and solemn occasion, every attention has been paid to every side of the question, and yet those juries found themselves compelled, by the most irresistible evidence, to find you guilty of High Treason. Those of you who were not tried by Jury desired have the liberty of withdrawing your pleas. You knew that your cases had been decided by the verdicts which had been given. You are, therefore, all of you, before the world, guilty of High Treason— the highest offence known to our laws. Your insurrection, thank God, did not last long, but whilst it continued it was marked with violence, and with the murder of an innocent young man, who did not offer the least provocation. Your object was to wade through the blood of your countrymen; to extinguish the Law and Constitution of the country; and to substitute for the liberty of your fellow subjects, anarchy and ruin. Thank God your purpose failed. It is not my intention to dwell on this dreadful picture, but I hope may be allowed to express my sincere hopes and sincere wishes, that the example which you will furnish this important day, may deter others from yielding to the wild and frantic delusions of rapacious spirits, and warn others, if such others there be, from being made instruments in the hands of hellish agitators. Let me beseech you to weigh well your condition; your lives have become forfeited to the violated laws of your country. Make the most of the small portion of that life which is left, and endeavour to make some compensation to society by repentance. I cannot trust myself say more, [Here his Lordship was deeply affected,] but must pass upon you the awful sentence of the law, which is, that you, and each of you, be taken hence to the gaol, whence you came, from whence you must be drawn a hurdle to the place of execution, and be there severally hanged by the neck until you are dead; your head must then be severed from your bodies, which are to be divided into four quarters, and to be at his Majesty's disposal."

The greater part the unhappy men seemed deeply affected by the solemn address; but Brandreth remained unmoved. The prisoners were then conveyed back to gaol, followed immense concourse of people. Thirty-five persons had been originally brought for trial for this crime. Of these twelve were discharged on Saturday, the Attorney-General having declined to prosecute, and the Jury having in consequence found them not guilty. Of the 23, four were tried at length, and convicted. The remaining nineteen withdrew their plea of not guilty, and pleaded guilty. The four convicts are confined in the condemned cells, and walk by themselves in the adjoining yard. They are heavily ironed. Brandreth continues to cherish his beard. He wears the same dress, and looks exactly the same as during his trial— he walks with a very firm pace, and has much intrepidity in his air and manner.— Turner, in his look, gait, and general appearance, is the very picture of absolute despondency; never did a human eye more strikingly express "helpless, hopeless, brokenness heart."— Ludlam has a singular appearance of melancholy composure, the obvious result of deep distress, supported and tempered resolution and reflection — Weightman has no mark of despondency about him . it is remarkable that never associates with the other three, but while they are walking together drives backwards and forwards by himself. It may be worthy of notice, too, that Turner, Ludlam, and Weightman, have their work clothes, and not the dress they wore during the trial. The other nineteen prisoners are not ironed, and they have the free use of the common yard.

---


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001255/18171101/017/0003
Public Ledger and Daily Advertiser - Saturday 01 November 1817

SOUTHWINGFIELD REBELLION. MR. OLIVER

Mr. Oliver left London the on the 17th of April, in company with a Mr. Mitchell, who had been a delegate from Leeds, at the Meeting of Delegates in London. Mitchell was introduced to a society in Birmingham as the London Delegate. The character of this and other societies connected with it is one of the main points at issue. They passed through Derby on the 25th, and while coaches were changing, called upon Robertshaw, of the Talbot Inn. Thence they proceeded to Sheffield, Wakefield. Leeds, and other places Yorkshire, where Oliver was introduced as at Birmingham. Oliver, after he had parted with Mitchell, returned through Nottingham, and spent an hour there in fruitless inquiries after Thomas Bacon. Mitchell was in a few days afterwards apprehended, and has been in custody ever since. On the 21st of May, the very day after the motion respecting Parliamentary Reform was negatived, Oliver left London on his second excursion, visited Birmingham, came to Derby, and lodged a night with his recognized friend, the landlord of the Talbot, and set off on the morning of the 26th to Nottingham, accompanied by Mr. Burkin, who was introduced to him by Mr. Robertshaw. By Mr. Burkin he was introduced to a society in Nottingham. Mr. Burkin has been ever since in custody. Oliver went on to Sheffield, Huddersfield, Manchester, and Liverpool; returned again from Liverpool to Manchester, Huddersfield, and Wakefield. At Thornley, near Wakefield, he and several others were taken up on the 6th June by Sir John Byng's cavalry: he was immediately discharged, and he set off to Nottingham. There he was present, on the evening of 7th of June, at a meeting of the society to which Burkin had introduced him. On the same evening Brandreth and two others were sent to take a view of the barracks. On the next day Brandreth was at the White Horse, in Pentridge; and the scene which followed is well known. We have only one other fact to add to this narrative. A George Crabtree, printer, in Bradford, Yorkshire, had been frequently seen in Pentrdige; an apprehension was entertained that this man, who the witnesses for the prosecution did not know, might be represented to be Mr. Oliver; Mr. Lockitt, the Attorney for the prosecution, with a decision and impartiality highly creditable to him, insisted that Oliver should be presented to the witnesses. He was accordingly brought to Derby after the trials had commenced, lodged a night in the King's Head Inn, and was shown the next morning to the witnesses as Mr, Crabtree. They all at once protested that was just the Crabtree they saw at Pentridge.

Such are the naked facts, which neither party can controvert. Mr. Oliver, on his part, affirms, that he never prompted, instigated, encouraged, further than the negative animation which his presence as the London Delegate did certainly inspire. He represents Mitchell to have calculated, from what had taken place at Spafields, that 70,000 men were disposed to rise at once in London. He charges the society at Birmingham with having offered 150,000 armed men, and arms for as many more as would take them. Thomas Bacon, according to his account, was responsible for 30,000 men from Leicester, Nottingham, and Derby, and double the number if necessary. Altogether there was an army estimated at 286,000 men. The supreme meeting of Delegates was held at the Joiners' Arms, kept by B. Scholes, in Wakefield. There Mitchell, Bacon, Oliver, and Whitworth from Birmingha, and a few others, met. The day first fixed on for a general rising was the Monday after Sit F. Burdett's motion, which was the 25th of May. It was put off from that to the 4th of June, because the soldiers would be all drunk on that day. Mr. Oliver does not hesitate claim the merit of having again put it off to the 9th of June. He says he fell into suspicion at Nottingham on the 7th, because was well dressed, and lodged at the Blacksmoor's Head, and that they had formed a plan for shooting him.

On the other hand, it is affirmed, with the most vehement confidence, that every violent suggestion originated with Oliver; that he was repulsed with suspicion and disgust every where till he succeeded in deluding Bacon and Brandreth, giving them assurances of a general and irresistible rising.

Here, then, we have in explication of the facts we have stated, on the one side the assertions of a single person, avowedly a spy; on the other side, the assertions of multitudes, but those also avowedly reformers, and suspected of conspiring to overturn the Government.

FURTHER PARTICULARS OF THE LATE TREASONABLE PLOTS.

The following Statement has appeared in two Ministerial Papers:—

Now that the State Trials are over, and that the publication of any matters of fact can have no effect on the fate of the parties concerned in the outrages of last June, we proceed to communicate some particulars which did not appear in the course of the examinations at Derby, but of the authenticity of which we are well assured. These will, we apprehend, make those who were sceptical on the subject of the intended plot, be more than ever satisfied that they were in error. No doubt the ideas the conspirators, now that their insurrection has failed, will appear amusingly wild, and farcically extravagant; but the facts themselves are not unimportant, as they develop a more extended scheme of insurrection than we, before the trials, were led to expect.

The meeting of the 8th of June was preceded by several others, which paved the way to it. On the 17th of May, a meeting was held in a barn that stands in the midst of some large fields near Butterley, and which was ordinarily used but for the reception of cattle, and indeed appeared fit for no other purpose. Here, on the day above-mentioned, Bacon and Haynes, the Nottingham and Leicester Delegates, and many others, attended, and the state of the country was discussed. It was agreed that no redress could be hoped from his Majesty's Ministers, and that nothing short of the overthrow of the present Government would do any good. Several exhortations were delivered by the principal speakers (Bacon was one), the object of which was to shew, that the people ought to come forward, and not suffer themselves be daunted. No particular time was named for the rising. Cope, a man connected with the conspirators, and who worked at Butterley, was not at this meeting. He had, however, been sent for to the White Horse, at Pentridge, on the preceding night, where he found Bacon, who told him, that he was then going to Huddersfield; and added, they would all be risen in Yorkshire before he came back. He then inquired about the cannon at Butterley, and wished to know how soon it could be mounted, and whether it would be possible to convey it to Nottingham in two hours. One of the conspirators had said, this might done, if the best horses in the country were seized to carry it there. To this Cope replied, that it was impossible. Bacon renewed the conversation about the cannon at Butterley, of which he said he had heard when he was 150 miles off. At Butterley, however, there was in reality but one cannon worth mentioning. This was a four or a six-pounder. Several smaller pieces were there, which were usually fired on the occasion of any public rejoicing. Cope was further asked, how many cannon could be cast, and how many pikes made at Butterley in a day; and on answering, five the former and 200 of the latter, Bacon said —"that would do — that was plenty." Onion mentioned a place for seizing a depot at Leicester. It was proposed to overpower the garrison by means of sulphur balls. If these failed, the soldiers wives and children Were to be seized, and brought with halters about their necks, and to put to death if the soldiers still refused surrender.

On the Friday before Whitsunday, a man named G. Crabtree, a printer, at Bradford, made his appearance at Pentridge. He was then going to South Wingfield, and other places, to inquire what they could in the cause. This man was the delegate from Leeds, and occasionally acted a very violent part. The conspirators came a determination that Nottingham should made their capital; Birmingham, Manchester, and Leeds, were to have local governments provided for them; but Nottingham was to be the principal seat of power. It was proposed to adopt a Constitution founded on that of the United States of America. A convention was in the first instance to sit at Nottingham, to which each county was to be invited to send a member. A Congress was then be formed, and to sit in the same place, to consider what form of Government ought to be preferred; but the general feeling was, that the Constitution of America could not be improved upon.

While making these arrangements, they were not forgetful of the principal appointments necessary to made in the first instance. Sir F. Burdett they intended to make President; Lord Cochrane was to be placed at the head of the Navy; and Sir R. Wilson they named to be Commander in Chief of the Army. Other Gentlemen, who are known as Reformers, were to be honoured with important appointments.

To secure impartiality on the part of the Generals, it was resolved that no person should have a command in the place to which he belonged. Generals were to sent from Nottingham to Derby, from Derby to York, and *vice versa*.

A new Bank was to erected, and new coinage issued. The Establishment of the Church was to be altogether done away, and the revenues applied to "better purposes."

At one meeting it was taken into consideration what it would be proper to do with the members of the Brunswick family who might fall into their hands. It was debated whether it would better to allow them small annuities to live upon, or whether the proper course would be to put them to death. This discussion was adjourned at the suggestion of old Bacon; who was of opinion it would be time enough to settle that question when the parties most concerned in the decision should be in their power.

An immense army was to be formed at Nottingham. All the people from Yorkshire, and from the Peak, were to march there, as well as those from Manchester and Birmingham. All the cattle in Leicester were to be seized, and brought to Nottingham, for the use of the army.

Several unimportant meetings occurred between the 17th and 30th of May; but on the 31st a large meeting took place at Asherfield's barn. Bacon had then just returned from Manchester; he called upon the meeting to appoint a Committee of Arms, (a Committee to inquire what arms could be procured in the neighbourhood) at it was desirable to know on what they could depend; he said, the time for rising was fixed upon, but it had better not be made public; he wished to distract the attention of Government by frequent alarms, till their friends, like the boy in the fable, should have called out "wolf," so often, that the call should be disregarded at last when the wolf actually came; he said, a Military Committee had been sitting for a fortnight in Nottingham. According to his suggestion, a Committee of Arms was named, who were to make out lists of arms, and report to the next meeting. It was in consequence of this, that Turner produced the South Wingfield estimate at the White Horse, which was read by Ludlam the 8th of June. No other report appears to have been made.

A meeting took piece at a private house kept by Brassington. Sentries were placed to guard against surprize. Here, and at Asherfield Barn, it was debated whether, having marched to Nottingham, they ought to remain there; it was finally determined that this should be decided when they were assembled at Nottingham.

Onion, talking on this subject on the evening of the 4th of June, endeavoured to forward the interests of the plan, by informing one he met going home that all must go; and that it would be better for those who went first and "*voluntarily*". He had been turned away from the Butterly Works that day, because he refused withdraw himself from the Hampden Club. He said he did not care. The Revolution would be a better thing for him, as he did not doubt, if they pulled through it well, that he should have no occasion to work any more.

It was on the 5th of June that Brandrelh was introduced to those whom he was to command. Crabtree had returned from Birmingham, where he said all was ready and well, and the people of Birmingham were so confident of success, that they were quite sure they could take care of their own soldiers, and not only of their own, but of all the soldiers in England. He exhorted them strongly to go on. The people had only to be firm and unanimous, and they were sure to succeed. While was speaking, Brandreth came in. He told the meeting they were all to march to Nottingham, to which place he was appointed to conduct them. On the following day Brandreth was introduced to Cope; he enquired if the Butterley men were staunch, as some doubts were entertained of them; he talked about taking the cannon, but this, it was finally settled, should depend upon orders from head-quarters.

These are the principal incidents in the history of this conspiracy previous to the 8th of June. On the 7th the workmen Butterley were sworn in as Special Constables to defend the works. More than 100 were so sworn in the course of about half an hour. This was a happy thought. Many them were known to be connected with the conspirators, and when it was heard by their accomplices that they were made Special Constables, the bond of their union was at once dissolved by suspicion. As soon as a considerable number had been seen taking the oath, others, their fellow workmen, animated *l'esprit de corps*, of themselves offered to do the same; and these, though known to have been concerned with the disaffected, in the hour of severe trial on the morning of the 10th of June, when Brandreth and his party appeared, conducted themselves remarkably well.


`[The papers were widely reported, eg also in https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000052/18171106/004/0002
Derby Mercury - Thursday 06 November 1817, reprinting "The Morning Post of Friday last" ]

----


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0001316/18171105/003/0002?browse=true
Evening Mail - Wednesday 05 November 1817

> William Turner lived with his parents in the village of Southwingfield. Their house is a very neat stone building, the work of their ill-fated son. All the neighbours speak of him as, engaged in these concerns, active and civil; his fault was that he occasionally drank too much, and then lost all sense of prudence and all power of control.

p2-3

DERBY, Sunday, Nov. 2.
CONVICTS FOR HIGH TREASON
The Chaplain was authorized to communicate evening to the throe unfortunate men, *Brandreth*, *Turner* and *Ludlam*, that they were to suffer the sentence of the law on Friday next. Some time before this communication was made, *George Weightman* was taken into a room in front of the gaol. This circumstances furnished to the other three matter of melancholy reflection. Brandreth walked stoutly by himself up and down the length of the yard. Turner and Ludlam paced slowly across the further end of the yard, and seemed in earnest discourse, perhaps on the possibility of the Royal mercy being extended to them. Weightman, on hearing that he was respited till Friday the 14th of November, became flushed and considerably agitated. Brandreth was then separated from his two associates, and informed of his fixed doom. He said nothing, but seemed struck with momentary horror. He gradually resumed his ordinary look and manner.

It was then judged proper by the High Sheriff and Mr. Lockitt not to make any communication of the subject to Turner and Ludlam till to-morrow morning. Brandreth and Weightman are therefore confined this night in a cell together, and Turner and Ludlam in another cell.

It is a curious circumstance that Brandreth happened to be a spectator at the execution of Despard, and well remembers the conduct of that criminal on the scaffold.

SOUTHWINGFIELD REBELLION. DERBY, November 2.

Pentridge, Southwingfield, and Wingfield-park, are the last places in England that could be suspected of becoming the scene of treason and rebellion. The country is fertile and picturesque; the population thin and scattered; the inhabitants simple, industrious, and affectionate. How a delusion so wild, so foreign to their habits, so fatal to their peace, and the lives of some of them, was introduced among these humble villagers, is matter of much anxious curiosity, but still obscured by inextricable perplexities. We will first detail circumstances that seem satisfactorily ascertained, and then mention surmises that must be received with considerable reserve and suspicion.

Brandreth, Haynes, and person of the name of Mann, impeded the barracks at Nottingham, not, as appears on fuller investigation, the 7th of June, but three days earlier , for on the 5th of June Brandreth came to Pentridge, never to return again to Nottingham. Thomas Bacon, whose home (if a character of such migratory habits may be said to have had a home) was in the village of Pentridge, had gone early on the 5th to Nottingham, and returned in the evening accompanied by Jeremiah Brandreth. Brandreth slept that night at the White Horse public house, kept by Mrs. Weightman, sister of Thomas Bacon. Next day Brandreth went to Swanwick, a small village north-east of Pentridge, and on the road from Derby to Alfreton. There he slept on the night of the 6th. On the 7th he the went to the fair at Belper, a village three miles south-west of Pentridge, on the Chesterfield road. On the night of the 7th he slept at a friend's house at Heage, a village on the same road, but nearer Pentridge. On the 8th he was the whole day at the White Horse in Pentridge; he slept there that night, and remained till towards evening Monday the 9th, when he and several others proceeded to Southwingfield. This village is beautifully situated on the summit of a hill, three miles north-west of Pentridge, about one mile to the west of the Chesterfield road, and three miles due west of Alfreton. Pentridge is also finely situate a rising ground, and is about twelve miles from Derby. Pentridge-lane-end is south-west of Pentridge, and on the Chesterfield road. We will now trace Brandreth's route on the night the 9th. Late in the evening he and his party are seen at Hunt's barn. This is roofless ruin of a barn, in a field belonging to Colonel Halton. It is situate on a hill nearly a mile to the right of Southwingfield. Thence they proceeded southward, through closes and over hedges, till they came to Samuel Hardwick's. They then turned to the right, and came to Henry Tomlinson's: then again turned abruptly towards the south till they came to Elijah Hall's. From Hall's they turned to the left to Isaac Walker's and Henry Bestwick's. The three last houses are situate at equal distances on the south side of a hill, and in the same latitude with Pentridge. Then directing their course south-east towards Pentridge-lane-end, they came to Samuel Hunt's and to Mrs. Hepworth's. This last is a very substantial farm-house, separated from Pentridge-lane-end and the Chesterfield road, the river Amber, and one field. is said have intended shoot Mrs. Hepworth's son, whom hated, overseer, and whom he suspected to be determined to refuse arms, and to have shot Walters by mistake. At Pentridge-lane-end, too, is Samuel Fletcher's house. There are in this little village but five or six houses. From this place they ascended north-east by the lane (for hitherto they had kept no road or path) to Pentridge. There a few from the neighbouring places were assembled to join them. The whole extent of ground traversed by them from Hunt's barn to Pentridge-lane-end is called Wingfield park. Immediately below the hill on Southwingfield is situate as Col. Hallon's house. To the front of it are seen the ivy-covered runs of Wingfield-castle, where Mary, Queen Scots, was once imprisoned. Isaac Ludlam's house is on the south side of this lull. Coburn quarry is within a few hundred yards of the house; and a little further southeast towards Pentridge is the wiremill,on the Chesterfield road, and about a mile north of Pentridge-lane-end. Old Isaac's house is quite off the course taken by Brandreth; but George Weightman and some others appear to have crossed over from the wire mill. Coburn-quarry, and Isaac's house, and then lo have turned south-west along Finchley-lane, till they joined Brandreth at Elijah Hall's. From Pentridge they proceeded south-eastward to the Butterley works, which are upon the Alfreton road. Thence they turned to the right along the turnpike-road till they came to Ripley. and then took the road the left towards Nottingham. Before they came to the glass-house in Codnor, a party from Swanwick joined them. Codnor is a village halfway between Ripley and Langley-mill, which is on the boundary between Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire. Eastward, the ultimate point to which this extraordinary expedition made its way, about tine mile beyond Langley-mill.

In this business it is manifest that Brandreth acted a leading part. It is remarkable that he had been on the 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th at all the places from which any person came to join the insurgents. For him the people of Pentridge and Southwingfield have no sympathy and express no compassion.

William Turner lived with his parents in the village of Southwingfield. Their house is a very neat stone building, the work of their ill-fated son. All the neighbours speak of him as, engaged in these concerns, active and civil; his fault was that he occasionally drank too much, and then lost all sense of prudence and all power of control.

Isaac Ludlam has, till the present time, possessed the esteem of his neighbours and acquaintances. He inherited some property from his father; he rented also some farms, and bought a little land. His speculations at last became quite unfortunate. He failed, and assigned all his effects to his creditors. He then endeavoured to support himself, his wife, and his family of more than 12 children, by providing and carting stones for house-building. Thus he worked at Coburn quarry. In the severe pressure of the late hard times this resource failed him, and, in an evil hour, old Isaac Ludlum was persuaded to join in Brandreth's attempt. His eldest son, William, had married a short time before this fatal occurrence. It may be mentioned, that Isaac Ludlam's house bears evident marks of the distressed circumstances of its late tenant. In the four casement-windows several panes are supplied by pieces paper. The decayed thatch is repaired in several places by loose flags of stone. The owner regularly attended the Methodist meeting, and in the absence of a preacher conducted the prayers and praises of the people.

We will now advert to the source of much doubtful information respecting the origin of this mischief. It must be recollected that Antony Martin, the leading witness in the late prosecutions, said he had been brought to the White Horse on the 8th by John Cope, one of his fellow-workers at Butterley. This man had a great deal to tell on the subject; but his information is thought liable to suspicion. According his account, meetings had been held in the Asherfield-barn, an empty house in a field on the Pentridge side of the Butterley-works, previously to this insurrection. At these meetings Bacon used to unfold the whole extent the conspiracy, and to name the arrangements of the new government, Sir Francis Burdett was of course to be the head, and the several subordinate reformers were to have their appropriate stations. In this mighty project Cope was to act a most important part: he was to be at the head of the hundreds of Butterley men, who were to supply themselves and others with arms at a moment's warning. Cope, however, hesitated to undertake to lead his men to Nottingham, and represented that they could be much better employed at Butterley, forging cannon at the rate of three, and pikes at the rate of 300, per day, for the benefit of the new government. With this proposition Bacon went, on the 5th of June, to the Secret Committee at Nottingham: Brandreth returned with him. (Haynes, a native of Leicester, but resident in Nottingham, is said to have originally been designed to conduct the expedition, but happened to get a seasonable illness to prevent him. He has never been at all molested on the subject.) Brandreth went in the evening alone to the Asherfield-barn, found Crabtree harranguing there, and apologized for the absence of Tom Bacon on account of fatigue. Cope was not at this meeting, and next morning he found a threatening letter thrust under his door. He had next day an interview with Bacon and Brandreth, and was told that no change could be made in the original plan, and he must therefore be prepared to lead all the Butterly men to Nottingham, or be himself shot. After this, he had repeated interviews with both Bacon and Brandreth. Bacon said, that he could not appear, as a warrant was out against him from Lord Sidmouth. He was in his house all Sunday the 8th, and Brandreth frequently went out of the White Horse to consult with him. He also consulted with him before he left Pentridge for Southwingfield on the Monday, and on his return again at night. Bacon had been immediately before at Birmingham, Manchester, Huddersfield, Wakefield, and Sheffield, and reported the numbers ready to rise in all these places.

Such is the story told by Cope. That Thomas Bacon was the immediate instrument of the delusion and the mischief, is most confidently believed all his neighbours, and is perhaps rendered rather probable from the undoubted fact that the whole family of Weightmans, his nephews, hitherto peaceable subjects, were engaged in this enterprise. The probability may also be increased, perhaps, by the fact that Bacon had just returned from Yorkshire. As to Mr. Oliver, the same uncertainly still prevails. He was at Nottingham on the 26th of May, and on the 7th of June. He had been in the mean time in various parts of Yorkshire and Lancashire. But what passed between him and Bacon, it is impossible hitherto to ascertain with any degree of certainly. In the mean time regret is every where expressed for all the unhappy convicts, except Brandreth and Bacon. Brandreth has lately been heard to say, that he merited death, but that he alone (of the four) merited it. Turner and Ludlam continue to show the same symptoms of dejection. The latter occasionally bursts into heart-rending lamentations over his fate.

Mrs. Weightman has been deprived of her license. Her son William, who is one of the 19 that have pleaded guilty, has a wife and three children. He was apprehended when looking for his brothers. The two brothers who are discharged were 20 weeks in gaol.


---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001255/18171110/009/0003

Public Ledger and Daily Advertiser

Monday 10 November 1817

p3

EXECUTION OF BRANDRETH, TURNER AND LUDLAM FOR HIGH TREASON

Derby, Friday Nov. 7. Before we detail the circumstances that attended the last awful scene of the distressing drama which ignorance, delusion, and discontent, have lately exhibited in this place, we beg leave to mention a few particulars of the conduct of the wretched victims of the law on the day preceding the execution.

It will be recollected, that Brandreth latterly spoke less favourably of his trial than he had done at first. He was heard occasionally to mutter, "Oliver has brought me to this." "But for Oliver I should not should not have been here." On Thursday morning, the Rev. Mr. Pickering said to him, that it was well known where Oliver was for several days before the insurrection, and that it could proved was not with him. He made no reply. He was then asked, how he came engage in such enterprize. He said, he would answer no questions of that kind, and begged that might not troubled with any. The Clergyman asked him if he felt no dread of the death that was now so near; he replied coolly, "I feel dread." He afterwards prayed in the hearing of the Clergyman, who remarked to him, that he had expressed contrition for the murder he had committed. said, he felt no contrition on that subject. Thus he continued, ready to join in any act of religion, insensible of any remorse, and proof against all fear. At half-past three in the afternoon he took his usual walk. It rained pretty heavily, and his heels were seen bare through his worn-out stockings; yet he walked backwards and forwards as both his mind and his body were perfectly at ease. At the same time, his features and looks had no symptom of insensibility. G. Weightman was labouring slowly and heavily along, with his massy chains clinking at his heels; the reprieved prisoners were singing hymns in the adjoining rooms. Brandreth was quite regardless of all.

Turner and Ludlam declined again to move out of their cell. Ludlam's sons, his brothers, and his sister, saw him for the last time. They prayed together with an earnestness and a fervour that were quite overpowering. They were all dreadfully agitated at parting. Yet Ludlam shortly afterwards said had feared it would have been worse. Turner's brother saw him again this day (Thursday), and their final parting was deeply affecting. Both Turner and Ludlam were extremely penitent. They protested they never should have moved in the unfortunate affair but for Bacon and Brandreth. They blamed Thomas Bacon more particularly, and said they considered him the author of all the mischief. Turner had been with Brandreth on the 6th, 7th, and 8th of June. They both continued to express much anxiety that should become penitent and sorrowful for his cruelties and bloodshed. Ludlam expressed strong wish that the People would hereafter be submissive and obedient to the King and the Laws.

This morning Ludlam and Turner looked shockingly wan and spiritless. They had watched the whole night in prayer and psalm-singing. At nine the Chaplain visited them, and assisted them in their devotions. They afterwards continued to pray aloud till the moment of immediate preparation arrived. Their expressions were always the same:– "O Lord, have mercy!" "O Lord, save my soul!"— "If I am on a bad foundation, upon a sandy foundation, Lord, take it now away, and set me upon the rock."—"O pardon all my sins for the sake thy Son, who died once for all mankind.!" –"O Lord, come now with thy strength, and support my soul."— While the one fervently uttered these expressions, the other kept answering "Amen." Then the other took up the prayer, and was accompanied in the same manner by his companion. Their voices were dejected in the extreme.

Brandreth slept as usual, rose in good spirits, and showed no sign despondency or fear.

From an early hour in the morning the scaffolding and drop were erecting in front of the gaol; and a considerable number of persons were collected in the street, quietly looking on, and listening with visible alarm to each sad note of preparation.

At half-past 11 all the prisoners, excepting the three men to be executed, and George Weightman, left the Chapel. All held their handkerchiefs to eyes, and sobbed deeply. Shortly after they had come into the yard, W. Turner's brother, Edward, shrieked horribly, and was carried into a room by two men. The Chaplain then administered the sacrament to the four convicts.

At 12 precisely, Mr. Simpson, the Under-Sheriff, appeared with a few javelin men, and a considerable number of special constables. The prisoners then descended from the Chapel to the room which Brandreth and Weightman had occupied. Here their irons were knocked off. Turner and Ludlam kept praying all the while. When Ludlam's chains were knocking off, he exclaimed— "O Lord Jesus! thou art tender-hearted! O be now my portion!"

At a quarter-past 12 the hurdle was drawn up at the door of this room. It was a very simple machine, farmed of a few boards nailed upon two long beams.— Brandreth came out first, and, while placing himself on the hurdle, said— "Some one hold me, lest I fall off." A man held him while the horse was driven slowly round the yard. He nodded the several prisoners as he passed along.

William Turner was next drawn on the hurdle. When he came close by the other prisoners they all screamed and wept most bitterly. When Isaac Ludlam was placed on the hurdle, he clasped his hands, and raised a fervent look towards Heaven. The prisoners cried out still more bitterly. Turner and Ludlam kept their eyes shut while on the hurdle. Brandreth and Turner were kept in a narrow passage of the gaol till Ludlam joined them. He, seeing them stand there, asked if he might not walk there for a little. Turning to the Chaplain, he said, "You remember what I mentioned to you," (we believe something relating his family). They then proceeded immediately in the same order to the scaffold. Brandreth looked coolly around upon the immense multitude of spectators; and in a loud and firm voice said, "God be with you all." He stood resolute and silent while the executioner adjusted the rope round his neck.

Turner came out next, and advanced with unusual firmness of step. While the executioner was putting the rope round his neck, he exclaimed loudly and distinctly, "This is all Oliver and the Government." The Chaplain at this moment came in front those two, and prevented any further observations.

Isaac Ludlam came out last; and when the rope was applied to his neck, devoutly said, "I receive this at the hand of the Lord;" then raising his voice to louder pitch, he prayed thus;— "O, may my soul now tower up to glory. O, may I now go where Angels and Saints worship thee. May I meet this great concourse of people Heaven. O Lord, I pray for high and low, and poor, and free. May this awful dispensation of thy providence be sanctified."— Here the Chaplain's voice in prayer having become louder than Ludlam's, Ludlam ceased to use any expressions of his own, and joined the Chaplain repeating, "Amen" to every particular Petition.

They all repeated the Lord's Prayer very distinctly, and immediately afterwards the drop fell.

Brandreth appeared perfectly composed during the whole time. He held a black silk handkerchief (the same which be had worn at the trial, and which had just been taken from his neck) in his clasped hands while at their last devotions. This he held in exactly the same manner after life forsook his frame. He dropped quite still, and seemed dead at once. His beard, which remained untouched, looked very frightful from underneath the white cap that was over his face. Turner, too, seemed sufficiently firm in his last moments, and died quietly. Ludlam, while praying, immediately before the drop fell, was visibly agitated, and seemed to die with much pain; for be was repeatedly convulsed after he had been thrown off.

The drop fell a quarter before one, and at a quarter past one they were cut down. Their coffins were piled upon the scaffold. The block, a long piece of timber, supported at each end pieces of a foot high, and having a small cog laid across the upper end of it, on which the neck of the body was to be placed, was fixed at the other extremity of the scaffold. Two axes and two knives, with black handles, were at the same time exhibited. Some saw-dust was then strewed on the scaffold. The crowd, considerably more than 6000 persons, kept together all this time. Brandreth's body was then laid upon the block, with the face downwards, and the head towards the street, in the full view of the people; the scaffold not being more than ten feet from the ground. The executioner raised the axe and struck at the neck with all his force. At that instant there was a burst of horror front the crowd. The executioner then took up the head, and holding it by the hair, addressed the people, "Behold the head of Jeremiah Brandreth the traitor!" Hitherto the multitude had been quiet and motionless. The instant the head was exhibited, there was a tremendous shriek set up; and they ran violently in all directions, as if under the impulse of sudden phrenzy. Those that resumed their stations groaned and hooted. The javelin-men and Constables were all in-motion; and few dragoons, who had been stationed at both ends of the street, drew nearer with drawn swords. But all became immediately calm. Very few of the immense multitude now remained, and these looked quietly on while the heads of Turner and Ludlam were successively exhibited in the same way. The heads and bodies were then put into the coffins, and all spectators dispersed.

The caravan of the prison, in which the prisoners were wont to conveyed the County Hall for trial, was now drawn up, and the three coffins, on each which was written in chalk the name of its inmate, were placed in it, and driven off to St. Werburgh's Churchyard, where one deep grave had been prepared for the reception of the whole. The Javelin-men and Under-Sheriff followed, and forming a line round the exterior wall of the burial-ground, the coffins were carried in, lowered into the grave, and covered with earth, without any further ceremony. The Javelin-men then returned to their several homes. Nothing further worthy remark occurred. During those hours in which Brandreth was not employed in prayer, he occupied himself in knitting a work-bag for his wife, upon the surface of which contrived to form, with different coloured cottons, various ornaments. This he mentioned, in a letter written just before his execution, as his last relic. He also left behind him, with disentions that it should be transmitted to his wife, the list of witnesses with which he had been furnished previous to his trial, on the blank sides of the leaves of which he had written, in a fair hand, a letter to his sister, and that to his wife, which we have mentioned. These letters breathed nothing but the spirit of the purest religion, and made no allusion whatever to the cause his death, or to the outrages in which be had been engaged. Indeed, both to the Rev. Mr. Pickering, and every other person who touched on these subjects, he said they were matters between God and himself, with which no human being had any thing to do. There were also written in the same book several forms of prayer of his own composition; all shewing his perfect acquaintance with the Christian religion, and his sincere belief in all its doctrines.

We have already so frequently mentioned the unusual firmness of his mind, that it is almost unnecessary to add new facts to prove it more fully, except that such occasion every little minute detail becomes interesting. While his irons were knocking off, preparatory to his going out for execution, be called for his pipe— it was brought to him lighted, and he smoked with great coolness while the same operation was performing on his companions. He then resigned it.

Those with whom he shook hands, stated that be was extremely warm, and his face was covered with perspiration. When found by W. Turner in the little passage of the prison, and waiting for Ludlam, who had yet to be drawn upon the hurdle, he seized him vehemently by the hand, and exclaimed— "Never mind, my dear fellow, we shall shortly be in Heaven, with the Father of all, where all trouble will be at an end." —Wm. Turner grasped the hand of Brandreth, and said he hoped so. Mr. Pickering now asked Turner if he felt more resigned to his fate; he answered, that he had prayed all night for fortitude, and believed he should suffer without fear. He was then asked how he felt as to his consciousness a future state? To which he answered, he had prayed that subject, but had no answer. His tones were firm, but he was the image of death, and certainly did not die with that true religious feeling or charity in his heart by which Ludlam and Brandreth were distinguished. He was cold as ice when he mounted the scaffold.

All the Papers left the prisoners were given to Mr. Lockett, who, after taking Copies, directed that they should be duly forwarded. Among other Papers found in Brandreth's bag, was a Letter sent from London, inclosing him a 1l. note, exhorting him to die with manly firmness, but not with fool-hardiness. His writing on the blank pages of the list of witnesses who wore subpoenaed on his trial, as mentioned above, led to a belief that he was writing the history of his life; but this turns out not to have been the case. His writings consist of prayers his own composition, written with great energy— a Letter to a sister and brother, pretty much in the same strain with that first sent to his wife and, lastly, on the very last page, the following Letter to his Wife, which he wrote on Friday morning previous to his receiving the sacrament:

"My beloved Wife— This is the morning before I suffer. I have sat down to write my last lines to you, hoping that my soul will shortly be at rest in Heaven, through the redeeming blood Christ. I feel no fear in passing through the shadow of death to eternal life; so hope you will make the promise I have, to your own soul, as we may meet in Heaven, where every sorrow will cease, and all joy and peace. My beloved, I received a letter this morning with a 1l. note in it, which I leave for you in the gaoler's hands, with the other things, which will be sent to you, as I shall mention before I have done. This is the account of what I said to you: one work bag, two balls of worsted and one of cotton, and a handkerchief, an old pair of stockings and shirt, and the letter I received from beloved sister, with the following sum of money: 1l. 12s. 7d. This, suppose, will be seat in a packet to you by some means. My dearly beloved wife, this is the last correspondence I can have with you, so you will make yourself as easy as you possibly can, and I hope God will bless and comfort you, as he has me; so my blessing attend you and the children, and the blessing of God be with you all now and evermore. Adieu; adieu all for ever. Your most affectionate husband, "J. Brandreth."

The letter to which he refers, and which came from London enclosed to Mr. Eaton, is as follows: 

"JEREMIAH BRANDRETH. —I cannot help feeling pity as I really believe from what I read of you in the newspapers that you possess the materials to make a good man'; but unfortunately, from some cause or other, they have been perverted to a most shocking purpose. I therefore request you accept trifle towards carrying into effect the charitable and kind intention I bear you have expressed provide for your wife and children before you die; trusting that you will continue to conduct yourself as a man whose whole strength and consolation is in Christ. Use boldness, which hath in it more the fool than the wise man; but keep a calm and dignified silence much ever you can.

(Signed) "A Total Stranger."  
"Wednesday, Nov. 5, I817."

It appears that Brandreth has several relations living in the neighbourhood of Nottingham.

---

https://curiosity.lib.harvard.edu/crime-broadsides/catalog/46-990059387100203941
Broadside

1817

p?

"ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE, TRIAL & BEHAVIOUR OF Jeremiah Brandreth, William Turner & Isaac Ludlam, Who were executed on the New Drop, in front of the County Gaol, Derby, on Friday November 7th 1817 FOR HIGH TREASON."

//via https://www.genealogy-links.co.uk/html/life.trial.behaviour.html

JEREMIAH BRANDRETH, Alias John Coke, alias the Nottingham captain, WILLIAM TURNER, ISAAC LUDLAM, the elder, and a number of other were brought to trial at the County Hall, in Derby, on Thursday the 16th October 1817.

It appeared on evidence that a number of persons, from one to five hundred, assembled in the Parish of Southwingfield, in the county of Derby, and with guns, pistols, swords, clubs, pikes, bludgeons and other offensive weapons, maliciously and traitorously did levy and make war against our Lord the King, and his laws; and after their trials, which lasted several days, were found GUILTY of HIGH TREASON, and the following sentence passed on them.

That you and each of you be taken to the jail from which you have been brought, and thence drawn on a hurdle to the place of execution, where you shall be severally hanged by the neck till you be dead, and afterwards your heads be severed from your bodies, and your bodies be divided into four quarters, and placed at his Majesty' disposal; and may the Lord God of all mercy have compassion upon you.

JEREMIAH BRANDRETH, aged 27, Framework Knitter, was born in Exeter; he has left a wife and two children, who now reside at Sutton-in-Ashfield, in the County of Nottingham. A short time before his execution Brandreth's wife visited him in prison, and asked him some particulars as to his hooting Mrs. Hepworth's man, but he declined giving her any information on the subject: and being asked the reason why he had not been shaved during his imprisonment, she replied, "It was not to disguise himself, but that it appeared to him more natural in that state." He was not much affected at seeing her, and she was less distressed than might have been expected.

When Brandreth was asked by the Clerk of Arraigns, what he had to say, why sentence to die should not be passed upon him, according to law, he replied, "I would ask for mercy, if it were possible, that mercy could be extended towards me, and would address you in the words of out Saviour If it be possible, let this cup pass from me, yet not of my will, but the will of the Lord be done."

WILLIAM TURNER, aged 46, Stone Mason, was a tall man, and had been a soldier, was born at Southwingfield, in this county, and a single man. Several persons gave Turner a good character, who said they had known him for many years, and always considered him a loyal and humane man till this happened.

On Wednesday Turner took a final leave of his brothers and relations. He was at once visited by eleven persons, who left him calm but were themselves in the greatest possible affliction.

ISAAC LUDLAM, aged 52, Stone Mason, was born at Southwingfield, in this county, has left a wife and seven children to lament his untimely end. A short time before his execution he wrote an affectionate letter to his wife, in which he recommends her to live in the fear of God, and to bring up their children in the ways of religion, which will always prove ways of pleasantness, and the end will be everlasting life It having been asserted in some of the public papers that he was a dissenting Teacher, and in others that he was a Methodist Preacher; we have good authority for stating that he never was a Methodist Preacher, nor did he ever hold any office in that body.

One Tuesday Isaac Ludlam received a visit from his wife and daughter. Mrs Ludlam is a very respectable looking woman. Her distress on account of the situation of her husband was great in the extreme. His doom seemed death to her. Words cannot adequately describe the mournfully affecting interview. The parting moments when the husband and father gazed on the wife and child for the last time was terrible. Burning tears mingled with fond embraces, were often repeated, and the mother and the daughter left the prison in all the horrors of despair.

Since condemnation they have been regularly attended by the Rev. J. Pickering, Chaplain of the Gaol, and have for the last few days conducted themselves in a manner becoming their awful situation. This was the first execution for "a levying of war against the King," that ever took place in Derby. We trust in God that it will also be the last.

On the morning of execution the prisoners partook of the Lord's Supper, and joined the Chaplain in fervent prayer and we hope that their prayers were heard.

About twelve o'clock the unhappy sufferers were brought out in front of the County Gaol, and after a short time spent in prayer, were launched into eternity, in the presence of a vast concourse of spectators, and after hanging the usual time, their bodies were taken down and their heads cut off and held up for public view, while the executioner exclaimed, "Behold the Head of the Traitor."

The untimely end of these unhappy men is an awful warning of the sad effects of walking in the way of transgressors, and of the bitter consequences of neglecting serious religion. Ludlam once in his life for a short time was connected with a religious body, but fell from his profession. Brandreth nine years ago had some religious impressions, though he unhappily suffered them to die away; but he never connected himself with any body of professing Christians. Had they in sincerity followed religion, they would have they would have found among either the serious dissenters or the Methodists, those who would have been their helpers in the way to heaven, and they might now have been loyal subjects and useful and respected Christians

This document was originally printed at the time of the executions in 1817, and was transcribed & edited by Helen Wilson (2001)

See also; https://www.historyofinformation.com/detail.php?id=4969



https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000268/18171103/026/0003#

Leeds Intelligencer - Monday 03 November 1817

top left - editorial; also p4 on Special Commission https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000268/18171103/018/0004