# Ward Libel



TO DO

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002577/18190118/017/0003
London Packet and New Lloyd's Evening Post - Monday 18 January 1819

LAW INTELLIGENCE. COURT OF KING'S BENCH, JANUARY 16. r. CLEMENT. This was an action for a libel. Lid at 5000/. The damages were, Mr. Scarlett stated the else to the Jury. The liresent way a ease of no common interest in a politic4l point of view. The plaintiff had raised himself from a lower situation to that of master lace-manufacturer at Nottingham. He took part with the journeymen who stood out for the increase of wages, and gave them that increase himself. When the, disturbances broke out in that part of the country, Ward. 'became the Treasurer; and when the Habeas Corpus was suspended in June, 1817, he was taken from his family by 10 or -12 Constables, and, after ineffectual applications to the Magistrates at Nottingham, he was 'conveyed to Cold Bath-fields prison, and from thence to Oxford, where he remained till the 13th of November following, when he was released. But when he arrived at Nottingham, he discovered, to his astonishment, that the Editor of a Newspaper, called The Observer, had sent into the world, on the 10th of November, 1817, a Paper, published different to the usual. form, partly blank and without a stamp, differing materially from the Paper of the preceding day (Sunday), the 9th of November, of which it purported to be a second edition. In this Paper, under the head of "Derbyshire Insurrection, and Execution of the Convicted," a full detail of all the circumstances connected with those unfortunate proceedings is professed to be given; in the course of which Ward, the plaintiff, who knew nothing of politics or of Oliver, except what he might casually gain from reading a Newspaper, is accused of "being one of the individuals who formed the Secret Committee at Nottingham, to whom 'Oliver was introduced; and by whom he was informed' that all was ready; and further, that some of the Luddites who were convicted and executed at Leicester, just previous to their execution, declared, that the plaintiff', Frank Ward, was one of the old Ned Ludds, who were appointed to command the rebel forces; that he had proceeded to his appointed post, from whence he was, with others, to march, for the purpose of storming the barracks, at an appointed time." This was the libel.. Ann Ward, daughter of the plaintiff, deposed, that her father lived at Nottingham, and was known by the name of Frank Ward. He was a lace-manufacturer; employed 10 or 11 hands, and conducted his own busines's. Recollected the Constables coming to her father's house on the 15th of June, 1817; they searched the house, and, having, done so, left it before her father did; he afterwards went out; this was about four o'clock in the afternoon of Tuesday; after he went out he did not return, and on the Saturday morning after witness saw him in custody. He returned home soon after the 13th of November, 1817. J. Holmes knew Oliver; was confined in Cold Bath-fields in the month of June; was taken up at Nottingham. Ward was in custody at the same time, so was Haines; they were brought up to Cold Bath-fields at the same time. Mr. Goodyer, the publisher of The Observer, stated ) the number of Papers sold on Sunday, the 9th of No-  TO DO

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000156/18190127/018/0004
Bury and Norwich Post - Wednesday 27 January 1819

CASE OF MR. WARD.

In our last a brief statement appeared of an action brought by a Mr. Ward against the proprietor of the Observer newspaper. — Few of our readers can forget the debate in the House of Commons on the 17th of February last, on a motion for inquiry into the allegations of the Petitions from those who were confined under the Suspension of our Liberties. On that occasion Lord Castlereagh entered minutely into the case of one of the petitioners, in order to shew, that as he had been guilty of the grossest misrepresentations, no reliance was to be placed in the statements of any of them, and consequently that no enquiry was necessary. The case he selected was that of Francis Ward. This man he stated to have been the instigator of the destruction of machines in various places, for which he had paid the perpetrators. This man, it was said, had plotted various outrages — was treasurer of the Luddites — had offered premiums for the murder of the Judge at Leicester — in short, his Lordship considered the bare recital of his crimes sufficient to deter the House from crediting the statements of the other sufferers, and such was its effect. This triumph was thrown in the teeth of the opposition repeatedly throughout the Session ; but how does the plain truth support it? Mr. Ward was a master lace-manufacturer, but having been a journeyman would not lower his wages in conjunction with the other masters, and when the men stood out for an increase of prices, as his own were liberally paid, he took the part of the rest, and upon some of the turn-outs being committed for trial, collected subscriptions for their legal defence in Court. Soon after this he was thrown into gaol, and having been removed from prison to prison, was at the end of five months sent home, without the slightest cause being assigned for his imprisonment. On reaching Nottingham, he found the libel had been circulated just three days before his liberation. The purport of the libellous matter, for which 600/. damages were given, was the same as the charge made against Mr. Ward in the House of Commons by Lord Castlereagh. It must appear somewhat singular to those who are ignorant of the artifices of political intrigue, that an individual in the humble walks of life should have obtained large damages for the mere imputation of that very criminality, which had been visited upon the person of the plaintiff by five months' imprisonment under the detestable Suspension Act. All have heard of the odious doctrine of modern jurisprudence, that truth is a libel; but no one would expect to find it enforced in favour of a man in low circumstances! Yet for following up the assertions of the Ministry (and who can doubt their words? ) is Mr. Clement fined 600/. O! admirable impartiality of the British Law, which is thus jealous of the defamation of the poor as well as the rich! — some will exclaim. Truly the laws, or rather the juries, are impartial, but not in the perveroion of reason and equity. It is for no truth that Mr. C. suffers. — He did not even attempt to extenuate his fault, or to mitigate the damages, by proving the statement he had published. On the contrary, the whole evidence went to confute the charges alleged against Mr. Ward. The connexion of Government with the proprietor of 'The Observer,' in the publication of so malignant a libel, is rendered manifest by the evidence given on the trial. All applications heretofore made to the Commissioners of Stamps, for leave to distribute gratuitously an additional sheet to a newspaper, in order to afford, on some particular occasions, more ample information to the public, have been refused, the Commissioners saying they had no power to dispense with the existing law of the land. But in the case of 'The Observer,' a second sheet unstamped was given away in profuse numbers. A dispensing poiver appears to be exercised somewhere. The fact is sworn to at the trial. Robert Webster, a fetter-carrier at Derby, "swore that on Monday, the 10th of November, he received a great quantity of 'The Observer' newspapers: they were delivered to him by Mrs. Eaton, the wife of the gaoler at Derby, who desired him to deliver them gratuitously, and she gave him a shilling for so doing." Thomas Cook, a letter-carrier at Leicester, deposed upon oath, that "he also received a quantity of 'Observers' — he received them at the post-office with his letters; thought it unusual. He was desired to deliver them gratuitously, and accordingly he did so; he received two or three shillitigs at the post-office for his trouble. Another letter-carrier, (he knew) at Derby, acted in like manner, and was in like i manner remunerated. Lord Castlereagh declared to the dependents of the Treasury, that he derived his information from the confessions of two malefactors who were executed, the one at Leicester and the other at Nottingham. This was fortunate ; for 'dead men tell no tales. At least, however, after the Observer had been suffered to be circulated unstamped by the servants of the Government, (which if it was not an encouragement was certainly a dispensation) it would but have been consistent to have brought forward such proofs as bad satisfied Lord C. in order to help Mr. Clement out of his awkward predicament. Can any one imagine the Ministry would suffer odium, or at least suspicion, to affix to themselves, by the conviction of the proprietor of a newspaper for a libel they had countenanced, whilst they have the means of clearing the character of the defendant, and thereby their own? — The whole business is of a piece with the other evidence of the green bag. But on perusing the admirable speech of Mr. Macdonald in the House of Commons on Thursday, one expression seems to strike forcibly upon this subject, and we trust premises an investigation of the subject within those walls where first it was published. The Ministers, exclaimed the Hon. Gentleman, "might continue to cry 'wolf,' they might resort to violence and rigour; they might suspend the constitutional rights of the subject; they might themselves violate the law by turning libellers ; but the end of all would be that they would recruit the ranks of their enemies^ ensure their own destruction, after th cv \ thrown odium on the Prince they served andi the Crown almost without support !" ' c A dinner took place on Tuesday at the C and Anchor Tavern, at which about 100 ne^ were assembled, to celebrate the triumph ofw" Holmes, one of the persons who had been i soned during the suspension ofthe Habeas ?? Act, ascribed his imprisonment to his effi^ 1 detect Oliver. Mr. Charles Pearson, the soT ' of Mr. Ward, stated, that having been nauciV pressed by Lord Castlereagh's statement, foj gone to Nottingham to ascertain, to his own ?? faction, the real character of Ward. He F that all whose motives for hating him wer ° U obvious, and creditable to Mr. W. loved a d' spected him. His character for veracity had L impeached by representing that he had, i„ , Petition, complained of his dungeon as d while in fact it was quite an Elysium. H mined that dungeon, and actually filled his T with water by drawing it up the wall ! Wank an appearance of great simplicity and modesty'