June 1817, Pentrich reports
October 1817 Pentrich trial


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002408/18170614/015/0003
Morning Herald (London)
Saturday 14 June 1817
p3

THE LATE RIOTS.

The advices of yesterday from Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire, we are happy to, find, are of a very pacific nature.

The following is from a Derby Paper of Thursday:

We have this week to announce to our readers the rising of a number of those deluded people who have for some time threatened the peace of the country under the influence of the Hampden Clubs. At the same time we have the satisfaction to state, that from the vigilance with which the conspiracy had been watched, and the promptness with which it has been met, there remains no cause for alarm or apprehension to the loyal and well affected. To say more at this moment might be improper. A number of prisoners have been taken, and their cases are under investigation before the Magistrates."— *Derby Mercury.*.

EXTRACT OF A LETTER FROM DERBY, JUNE 11.

"The symptoms of which were manifested yesterday seem to be quelled. It appears that two troops of hussars from Nottingham had arrived early yesterday at Langley Mill, where they found an assemblage of about three hundred persons, some having fire arms, others pikes, &c. The hussars charged the mob, who immediately dispersed; fifteen or sixteen of the ringleaders were taken and sent to Nottingham. Two troops of cavalry front Derby divided, one towards Ripley, and the other among the colliers near Hoanor. Between Ripley and Alfreton they found the Chesterfield troop actively employed, the dispersed mob having made their appearance on their route, issuing threats, &c. Great numbers have been secured. Five or six were brought to Derby in the afternoon, and about nine o'clock last night twenty-nine more. Several were taken this morning, and every thing now appears quiet. The disturbance is supposed to have originated in the discharge of some men from Butterly Foundry, in consequence of belonging to some Jacobinical Club."

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0002408/18171022/019/0002?browse=true
Morning Herald (London) - Wednesday 22 October 1817
p2

THE MORNING HERALD, LONDON, WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 22.

At length, a discussion has taken place in the Court, at Derby, which we may presume to repeat, for it relates not to the proceedings on the indictment, but to the propriety of some garbled publications, which have been made of parts of them in an Evening and in a Morning Paper. Our own Report of this discussion is before us: but we take that given by the Evening Paper in question, the *Courier*, in order to be clear from any suspicion of unfairness to a Contemporary, whose ease and security, after an infraction of the Order, which we have obeyed, might excite considerable envy, were the occasion one of greater importance. From our own manuscript Report we have taken nothing but a paragraph, which is annexed to the proceedings of the day. If it were not, that Lives are depending upon the trials, we should say, that this discussion is the only part of the proceedings, that have hitherto taken place, at Derby, to which any great attention is due. From this we are persuaded a discussion will arise in another place, which will end in rescuing the press from a dilemma incompatible with even those claims to respectability which no party has ventured to call immoderate. The Court twice delivered a most emphatic, intelligible and comprehensive injunction against any publication of its proceedings. It will be seen, that their Lordships were informed by the Counsel for the prisoners of the publication of a garbled Report of the ATTORNEY GENERAL's speech. They were told of this violation of their order; they enquired whether the Counsel had any motion to make upon it, and, being informed, that he had none, they passed on to the other business of the day with a mere repetition of their injunction. The predicament, in which Newspapers have been placed by this proceeding, would be of the highest interest to them, (and other publications would he involved in it) if the occasion were one of much public importance; and it is obviously desirable, that some regulation should be soon formed, which may provide for future emergencies. The Order of Court did not say, that, if any motion were made against those, who should infringe it, the Court would notice their conduct; if it had, other Newspapers would not have been afraid to do more than the *Courier* did, for they would not have apprehended any such interference. It threatened offenders unconditionally with the displeasure of the Court. There was not the slightest allusion in it to exterior contingency, upon which their displeasure was to depend. It is only after some papers have obeyed and others have disobeyed the injunction, that this contingency is made known. The Judges have doubtless acted with good intentions, and their rule is, at present, the only law upon the subject. But we are not afraid to ask their Lordships, with all deference and general respect for their stations and characters, whether, upon consideration, they do not think they have erred? whether their injunction should not have expressed the condition, upon which it would be enforced? It is the great consolation of Englishmen, under the pressure of their many burdens, that they live under KNOWN LAWS. We ask, whether the law, in the present case, could have been understood from the terms of the injunction; and we trust, that we may, without offence, exhibit this remonstrance. We hope also, that the case will lead to the enactment of some Parliamentary Law, which shall form a clear guidance for Courts and for the press in future, when occasions of such importance may occur, that the latter could not be left in uncertainty, without serious danger to it's useful rights.

To these observations we are led simply by a desire of the future regulation, for which we call, not by any wish for severities, as to what is past. Happily the present occasion is so far from exciting more interest than ordinary trials upon capital charges, that we have suffered no detriment by our obedience to the Court; if we had, the personal inconveniences of our Contemporaries would not remedy it; and we rather think, that those whose conduct is in question, know us better than to suppose, that we could find any satisfaction in their vexations. The fact is, that our interest and the interest of the newspaper press in general lies on the other side of the question. The present proceedings at Derby attract so little attention, that, when the day comes, on which every Newspaper will give its fair and unrestrained Report of them, one hundred additional copies are not likely to be sold by the whole body of Morning and Evening papers. The entire value of the occasion to Newspapers, is that a clear regulation may arise out of it for the future. For the sake of that, it is our wish, that the injunction of the Court at Derby, and the administration of it, may remain exactly as they are, calling for the cognizance of Parliament by the uncertainty which ensues from them— the deficiency of KNOWN LAW— and leading to a measure, which shall promote the independence, as well as secure the liberty, of the press.

---

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0002408/18170724/013/0003

Morning Herald (London) - Thursday 24 July 1817

HIGH COURT OF JUSTICIARY, JULY 19

THE KING V. ANDREW McKINLEY, FOR ADMINISTERING UNLAWFUL OATHS.

The Court having, yesterday, determined on the relevancy of the Indictment, it met again this monrng *(sic)*, and proceeded to the trial of the prisoner, when the interlocutor for the relevancy of the Indictment being read,

The ADVOCATE rose and addressed the Court, and stated, that, from the decision of previous day, the persons accused of the crime libelled had placed their lives in the full effect of the penalty of the law; but he thought he should be following only the beneficent views of the Government if he restricted the punishment to an arbitrary one. He then entered into a defence of his conduct on this occasion, and accused the Counsel on the opposite side of charging him with a desire to take away the life of the prisoner. This he denied, and averred that be only sought what was maintained in every Act of Parliament passed for the safety of the country. He vindicated, at the same time, the necessity for passing the Acts which at different times had been enacted for suspending the Habeas Corpus Act; and concluded by saying, that having never acted from any selfish motive, he despised the endeavours which had been made to lower him in the esteem of the Parliament or the public.

Mr. GRANT on the part of the panel, and made some spirited remarks on the speech of the Lord Advocate, particularly on the assertion formerly made of the Bar having entered into a combination to defend the prisoner.

After a few words from the LORD ADVOCATE in reply, the interlocutor, restricting the punishment to an arbitrary one, was read, and a most respectable Jury sworn. The first witness called was,

Robert Hamilton, Esq. Sheriff Depute of Lanarkshire. He proved the declarations of the pannel taken before, him. The declarations were then read. The first stated that he had been 14 years a private in the volunteers, and always did his duty; that he never heard of any association for overturning the Government by force, and that he never was at any meeting held for this purpose; that the meetings he was present at were only for the purpose of attending to the amelioration of the poor-rates. The 2d, that he was present at different meetings, the object of which he could not very well describe, but that they were principally concerning the poor rates; that he did not wish to disclose the names of the persons in whose houses the meetings took place, for fear of their losing their licenses. The 3d, that the object of all the meetings was merely the amelioration of the poor rates; and that the meetings were all public, and that every person wishing to aid in carrying this into effect were welcome to attend them, and that during his attendance nothing political was ever brought forward. 4th. After being admonished by the Sheriff to be aware of disclosing any thing against himself, he stated that he was afraid he bad been led away; that he understood that a club existed in Glasgow, consisting of gentlemen who would assist them in their plans; that an oath of secrecy was signed by those who became members of the society.

John Campbell, a prisoner in the Castle of Edinburgh, was then called, when Mr. JEFFRAY objected to his giving his evidence, as the prisoner's agent was denied all communication with him, and in effect that the prisoner had been denied all the benefit which he had a right to from this communication; the Governor of the Castle, in answer to the demand by the Counsel for the prisoner, having stated that he had not the power of allowing any person to see the person named. Mr. Jeffrey also stated, that the identity of this witness could not be proved, as both the civil and military power had refused all intercourse with him. He contended that the prisoner had every right to refuse the testimony of this witness, as he never had an opportunity of ascertaining whether the John Campbell in the list delivered him was the John Campbell who could appear against him. Mr. Jeffray contended, at great length, on the right which the prisoner had, by his Counsel or agent, to converse with the witnesses cited against him, and in consequence of this being refused by the Public Prosecutor, as well as the Governor of the Castle, in whose custody those witnesses were; and concluded by hoping the Court would not allow the witness to he called.

Mr. H DRUMMOND contended, that Mr. Jeffray's objection as to the identity of the witness was futile, as he could not prove there were any more John Campbells in the Castle of Edinburgh. He contended, that the duty of the prisoner's Counsel, if they had any objection to make with respect to their deprivation of access to the witnesses confined in the Castle, they ought to have brought it in a previous stage of the business, as it was not a new thing for witnesses to be confined by order of the Court of Justiciary in the Castle of Edinburgh, to prevent them from being tampered with.

The LORD ADVOCATE said, when the persons alluded to were first imprisoned, he had distinctly stated, that he desired that the names of persons who wished to sse them, or whom they might wish to see, should be handed to him, when he would either give his consent to their admission or refuse it, leaving these persons to apply to the Court if they found themselves aggrieved.

Mr. JEFFRAY contended, that he had every right to bring forward any objection which appeared to him of importance, to prevent the testimony of any witness which he might think detrimental to his client. He therefore said, that he had a right to do this at any stage of the trial he pleased. He again contended, on the impossibility of the prisoner in identifying the witness, and therefore that he could or ought not to be admitted to give evidence. He stated also, that that the Lord Advocate had given a peremptory refusal to the admission of the prisoner's Counsel or Agent to the persons confined without an order from the Crown Agent. He contended further, that the Lord Advocate had no power to prevent access to the persons whom the pannel had a right to see and converse with; and that he had suffered greatly, or was likely to suffer very much, by the privilege he had a full and complete right to being denied him.

Mr. CLERK followed' on the same side at considerable length. His arguments turned chiefly on the impossibility of the pannel identifying the person of the witness, and therefore he considered him as altogether incompetent to be examined.
  
The Court having taken the objection into consideration, they agreed that proof should be given of the refusal of the Lord Advocate to grant admission to the witnesses confined in the Castle, which was objected to by the Lord Advocate, without a distinct charge to this effect should be entered on the record. This being done, the Lord Advocate read a written statement, exactly the same as he had before verbally stated. A letter was then read from the Crown Agent, in answer to an application for admission to the witnesses, denying such admission in the most positive terms. Repeated applications, it appeared, were afterwards made, but received the same answer.

The Court having resumed consideration of the objection, Lord GILLIES observed, that he thought the designation of the witness sufficiently stated in the list of witnesses; but he thought at the same time, that the refusal of the Lord Advocate and Crown Agent, for any intercourse between the prisoner and the witnesses in the Castle, without any reason assigned, was detrimental to the case of the prisoner At the same time, he thought the prisoner's Counsel had been guilty of neglect, in not advising him at the proper time to apply to the Court for admission to the Castle, who would certainly have granted the permission required.

Lord PITMILLY and Lord RESTON delivered their opinions to nearly the same effect; and concluded by stating, this was not the time for starting such an objection.

The LORD JUSTICE CLERK was of the same opinion. The objection was of course repelled; when the witness was called in and sworn.

John Campbell—On the usual interrogatory being put to him, it he had received any fee or reward for the evidence he was to give, he answered, that *he had*.

The LORD JUSTICE CLERK then cautioned witness respecting the evidence he was to give, and he being perfectly freed from any trial connected with his share in the transactions, which produced this trial.

The Witness then addressed the Court, and stated his sense of the obligation of an oath; that he knew he must answer to GOD for what he said before this Court, and offered to lay before the Court the names of those persons, who had come forward to offer this reward.

He was then asked by the LORD JUSTICE CLERK, what were the grounds for his giving the answer to the question above mentioned?— Ans. He was apprehended along with the prisoner on the 22d of February, last, without cause assigned, or without a warrant; was called upon on the Thursday or Wednesday following, and was examined before the Sheriff Depute of Lanarkshire, and asked if he knew what he was brought before him for? told the Sheriff he did not. The Sheriff insisted that he did, and that it would be wisdom in him to make his breast clean.— After some similar conversation, the Sheriff left him alone with Mr. Salmon (the Procurator Fiscal), when Mr. Salmon came up to him and said, "John, perhaps you do not know that I know so much about this affair?" and added, "I know more about it than you think I do; you do not know that I have the oath you took at Leggatt's on the 1st of January." He then shewed him a scroll of an oath, saying, "You see, John, I have got it." He then added, "You and other persons (whom he named), took that oath at Leggatt's on the 1st of January." Witness then told him that he had not taken that oath. Witness had expressed his wish not to enter into any description of the ill usage, threats, and stratagems, practised upon him by the Sheriff of Lanarkshtre to induce him to become a witness by torturing him with the same questions, couched in different terms, which the Court agreeing to, he proceeded to state that after several examinations, and being closeted with Mr Salmon, one of these times, he cannot say at what date, Mr. Salmon (after using many entreaties, and these having failed) began railing against the prisoners as villains who had betrayed the witness: he said that it only his regard for witness that made him wish him to become an evidence—said then to him "I assure you I have six men who will swear you took that oath, and you are as sure to be hanged as you are in life."— Witness told him that if he got six men to swear he took that oath, they would perjure themselves. He replied, that it might be possible to get two or three persons to perjure themselves, but he did not think it was possible to get six to do so. After he said to witness "you will ruin yourself if you take this way, but if you take the other way you may do yourself much good." After much conversation he stated that saw nothing he had to apprehend from the one way, and no good that was to come from the other. Mr. Salmon said that the Lord Advocate was in Glasgow, and that he would come under any obligation he (witness) chose if he would be a witness. Shortly after this he was taken back to the Sheriff's room, when Mr. Drummond, Advocate Depute, came in, when he examined him, but the subject of the obligation was not then mentioned, and he was a few days afterwards sent to Edinburgh Castle. Some time after he came to the Castle he was visited by Mr Drummond, who stated to him that McKinley was served with his indictment, and that his name was in the list of witnesses, and now was the time for him to determine whether to become a witness or not; this he refused, saying, that if he did so he need not return to Glasgow. His reply was, that he might go to another town and change his name. Witness said he would change his name on no account; that it would be much the same if he lived in any other manufacturing town as in Glasgow. Mr. Drummond then stated that he had been thinking of a plan to writing to Lord Sidmouth to get him into the Excise; and that if witness chose he would write to Lord Sidmouth, and would shew him the answer he received. Witness answered, he did not choose the office of an exciseman, and remarked at the same time, that it was perhaps the only office under Government that he was capable for; but as it was an office which was generally attended with risk and ill-will, he did not choose to accept it, as he had already suffered considerably in that way as a peace officer. No person was present at this conversation, but Mr. Drummond had been with him several times in the Castle. Mr. Drummond asked, on one of these what witness wanted to have? when he remained silent, Mr. Drummond then stated, that if he would give every information, and if that information pleased the Lord Advocate, he would neither be called on as a witness, nor be tried. He then stated that it was a very uncertain matter; that he did not know what information they wanted, or whether they were not already in possession of all the information he was able to give; and that if his information did not please the Lord Advocate, he would be open to every attack they might choose to make upon him, Mr. Drummond then replied, "I do not know what to do with you; you see I am inclined to favour you as much as in my power; I shall give you a day or two think of it. Do you wish I should call back again?" After some hesitation, witness replied, he might do as he pleased. Mr. Drummond then left him; he called again a few days afterwards, when he said, "Now, Campbell, this is the last time; you must be determined now." He then asked it he written to Lord Sidmouth, and was answered no, as witness had rejected the offer. He was then asked if he had made up his mind; when he an that he had upon conditions, which were that he should receive a passport to go to the Continent; when he was told by Mr. Drummond that he supposed there was nobody could stop him. He answered, that being a mechanic he did not believe the laws of the country would allow him to quit it. Mr. D. replied with a smile, is that all? There is no question but you will get that, and means to carry on there. Witness then said, that on these conditions he was willing to become a witness, if his wife was included. Mr. D. replied, let us understand each other properly, for I should not wish to have any misunderstanding between us at the latter end. He then told him he believed witness had received a letter from his father, when, after some conversation, the situation of his wife was spoken of, when he stated to Mr. Drummond that his wife was in delicate health, and had nothing but what she earned; and he was apprehensive that, if it was known that he was to be a witness, the public might manifest their displeasure by ill will to her. Mr. Drummond then desired him to write to her, and to mark a *one pound note* on the letter, which he would enclose. He desired him to inform his wife that he was to be a witness, and to tell his wife to leave Glasgow and to go to witness's father's to stay for the present. The letter, however, was not sent, as the Lord Advocate objected to its being sent to the person to whose care it was directed, but to direct it to Mr. Salmon. The letter, however, was not sent, but Mr. Drummond directed the money to be given to his wife in Glasgow. An examination afterwards took place in the presence of the Sheriff, Sheriff Substitute, Solicitor General, and Mr. Drummond; the terms formerly agreed upon, viz. that he should receive a passport for himself and wife to go to Prussia, and means afforded to convey them thither, were discussed. His reason for making these terms was, that he did not consider either himself or his wife safe in this country, should he appear as an evidence in this business. The Sheriff (Sir W. Rae) refused to agree to them, and stated, as his reason for doing so, that being an officer of the Crown, it was his duty to see Justice done; and he assured the witness, that if he was to sign any such agreement, he would not be answerable for it for a good deal; for if, when he was brought to his oath as a witness, having any such agreement signed, and were to swear that he had received no reward, or promise of reward, he would perjure himself. Witness answered, "No; if it was considered the means of his preservation:" in which he was supported by Mr. Drummond; but the Sheriff persisted in his refusal to sign any such agreement; on which Mr. Drummond proposed, that the British colonies should be substituted for any other kingdom; but the Sheriff refused also to agree to this, adding, that he was willing to agree that every means necessary for the preservation of witness and his wife should be taken, but he would agree to nothing further. A pause in the conversation here took place; when, after a little, Mr. Drummond said to witness, "Now, Campbell, you know whether you can be a witness on these terms or not." Mr. Drummond, after another pause, said, "Now, Campbell, do you believe we are able to do for you what you expect without its being put down on paper?" Witness answered, he knew they were able if they were willing. Mr. Drummond replied, "Could you rely upon us for that?" Witness answered, "May I?" Mr. Drummond answered, "You may." To which witness replied, "Then I shall rely upon you as gentlemen." Shortly after this, witness was allowed to write his declaration himself, with the exception of one part relating to a Mr. Kerr. Some days after this the Sheriff and clerk came up to sign the declaration, when the Sheriff said to him, "Campbell, when you get rid of this business, go home to your loom, and leave them to rule the nation as they please." To which witness replied, that if he thought he was to go back to his loom, he would rather be served with an indictment after all he had written; to which the Sheriff answered, he had nothing to do with that, it remained between witness and others. Mr. Drummond visited witness after this declaration, when he ordered the gaoler to procure plenty of books for witness to read, which he got to the amount of about one hundred volumes. Shortly after witness wrote to Mr. Drummond for some clothes and money. Witness received a pair of shoes; but with regard to money, he was answered, he would get none till after the first trial, when he would get money; this was about three weeks ago. He wrote another letter to Mr. Drummond, stating a part of what had been put down in his declaration, as a gentle demand answers were conveyed to him by the gaoler, who told him he had them from Mr. Drummed.

The Court rejected this witness, as it appeared he came forward to give his evidence under the impression that he was to receive a certain remuneration, or had made an agreement to that effect.

Four witnesses, all prisoners in the Castle of Edinburgh, were then called in succession; they all admitted that they had attended different meetings at Glasgow, but that no oath of secresy was administered. The meetings were to consider of commencing reform societies; and as it had been hinted in the London *Courier*, that upon the meeting of Parliament the Habeas Corpus Act would be suspended, and that a very small crime might subject a person to its operation, it was necessary to provide against any member hurting his neighbour by any unguarded expression. An obligation or promise of secresy by shake of the hand was agreed upon, and confidence then took place, that no information from any other society should he used, to hurt any individual of these societies. All denied that any oath, such as stated in the indictment, was, administered; and one witness, Finlayson, declared that he would not have recollected one word of the oath of obligation had he not seen it in a newspaper, in a speech in Parliament.

The Court not allow this witness to be further examined on that point, as it was evident his information was derived merely from newspaper report, not from any thing within his own knowledge.

After examining these witnesses, the LORD ADVOCATE rose and addressed the Court, stating, that in consequence of the disappointment he had experienced in the turn which the evidence he had adduced had taken, he found he could not receive the verdict which his former impressions had led him to expect. He therefore would not take up the valuable time of Judges and Jury in going further into a discussion which could neither be beneficial to the country nor to the panne; he therefore left it to the Jury to return a verdict of—*Not Proven* or *Not Guilty*, as they deemed most proper.

Mr. JEFFRAY paid a high compliment to the Lord Advocate and the other Counsel for the Crown, for their humane conduct on this occasion, and stated that he had not seen an occasion on which the conduct of the Court had been directed to the maintenance of the Constitution, and the liberty of the subject, with more propriety.

The Jury, after consulting a few minutes in the box, returned a verdict of *Not Proven*.

The LORD JUSTICE CLERK then addressed the prisoner nearly as follows:—

"Andrew Mackinley, in consequence of what has passed this day, a Jury of your country has returned a verdict of not proven; you have been duly tried upon the most patient investigation, and the public prosecutor has not, upon this occasion, produced evidence to find you guilty of the charges in the indictment. The evidence has been unsatisfactory; but looking to your own declaration, and the minute given in by your Counsel, the verdict of not proven is a proper verdict. This verdict leaves, however, a mark upon your character which nothing but a life of rectitude will wipe off. You have had a full, fair, and impartial trial. It must shew you the safeguard of a British Jury, and mot leave upon your mind a conviction of the security and happiness of the people of this country—it shows that the laws extend to their protection. You now return to society. Have no more secret meetings, either by bonds, oaths, or engagements. Abstain from such practices, and no such charge can come against you again. Hold out for the future to your fellow countrymen, that the laws afford protection to the persons of the subjects, and charge them to hand down our happy Constitution unimpaite4 to the latest posterity. By your future life, justify the verdict of the Jury. If you have been misled by wicked men, be determined to live for the future in the paths of honesty, sobriety, and virtue."

Before leaving the Bar, the prisoner addressed the Court as follows:—

"My Lords, I am not in a capacity to stand, from my weak state of body, to return you my thanks in a long speech, but I thank your Lordship, and the Gentlemen of the Jury, for your unwearied attention in this long and arduous case; also the Lord Advocate, for his kindness to me during the time of my confinement, in admitting my friends to visit me without restraint. To my Counsel my feelings will not allow me to express myself."

The prisoner then bowed to the Court and retired.

The trial lasted from nine in the morning till ten at night.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0002408/18171022/019/0002?browse=true
Morning Herald (London) - Wednesday 22 October 1817
p2-3
SPECIAL COMMISSION

Derby, October TREASON TRIALS

FIFTH DAY.

*William Turner* was the person selected by Officers of the Crown to be tried next. This man was formerly in the Militia, but having volunteered in the 20th Regiment of Foot, he has since been abroad, and in Egypt and elsewhere fought battles of his country. He is a tall man, 47 years of age.

He was brought from the gaol in the same manner as had been pursued with *Brandreth*, linked to the wrist of Mr. Eaton, jun. at about a quarter below eight. He did not shew the same degree of firmness as had been displayed by his predecessor at the bar, nor did his countenance exhibit the same marked characteristics. He is a man of plain appearance: he was dressed very decently, in a blue coat and coloured waistcoat.

The Court having assembled at eight o'clock, and the confusion resulting from the admission of the public, having subsided, the prisoner was put to the bar.

The Lord Chief Baron then called on the Attorney General and the Counsel for the Crown to proceed with their challenges.

PUBLICATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS

Mr. DENMAN immediately rose, and addressed the Bench to the following effect:—

My Lords—I feel it to be my duty to call the attention of the Court to what I conceive to be a callous contempt of the order pronounced by your Lordships—calculated in my mind, to poison the due administration of justice, and a most barefaced insult to the authority of the Court. At the commencement of these proceedings, it was by your Lordships, most distinctly stated, that no publication of any of these proceedings was to take place, until the whole was completed; and on the following day your Lordships repeated that prohibition, in still stronger terms. Notwithstanding what was then said by the Court, a partial and garbled account of the proceedings has been issued from the public press: and calls, in my opinion, for the severest visitation of every Court of Justice, which does not mean to make itself a party to its own degradations. And the misfortune is, is that it is not a full statement, but a partial extract of a part of the proceedings, namely, the Attorney General's Speech; which is reported in such a manner, that the prisoners who now remain or trial, cannot, by any possibility, fairly take their trial; inasmuch as it is impossible that the Jury who are to try then can come unprejudiced into the box, after so garbled a statement. The paper I allude to, is the *Morning Chronicle*; that Paper I hold in my hand. It is the only Paper in my possession; though I am credibly informed that all the London Papers in some degree infringed the order of the Court.— Had this paper reported the whole of proceedings, I do not know, on the part of the prisoners, that my Learned Fried and myself would have objected; it is from a partial statement I think mischief is likely to arise. The pretence put forward for this contempt of the prohibition of the Court, makes it the less excusable. It is alledged by the publisher, that he is induced to make this publication in consequence of a vague publication having been made by another Journalist. Now, nothing can be more easy than to elude the order, and laugh at the authority of the Court, if such subterfuges are to be permitted. The *Morning Chronicle* complains that another Paper has published an imperfect account of the Attorney General's speech; and then it proceeds itself to give a more mischievous account, for the sake of correcting that which has been published:—and what makes this infinitely more dangerous is, that the paper which first published, and induced the publication of which I now complain, is under the known influence of Government.

Mr. Justice ABBOTT.—I don't know that. The Court can know nothing of any newspaper. They can know nothing of whether it is under that influence or under the influence of a private individual For myself, I can say truly, that I do not know the fact that has been stated, nor do I believe it.

Mr. DENMAN—I admit, my Lord, that I was wrong. The Court could not know any thing that did not appear before them upon affidavit. But what I complain of is, that it is set forward on one side as the pretence for publishing, that these prosecutions are brought forward for the purpose of supporting a party, and that Mr. Oliver is at the bottom of them; and the other argues that the Ministers are only taking active measures for repressing the disorders of the public peace and bringing the disturbers of the public peace to justice. These arguments are made the pretence for treating with contempt the order of your Lordship, and of violating that most wholesome proceeding which the Court had adopted in the outset of its business. I can only lay before your Lordships this imperfect account of the Attorney General's speech, which I do state is calculated to prejudice the cases of the remaining prisoners, whatever effect might have been produced by an impartial statement of the whole proceedings, and I leave it with your Lordships to do what you think proper.

The ATTORNEY GENERAL— I concur most entirely with my learned friend, Mr.Denman, in the justice of his complaint; and I can only say—

The LORD CHIEF BARON—Do you follow this with any motion?

Mr. DENMAN—All I can say is, that having made this complaint, I leave it to the Court to adopt such further proceeding as they think necessary to maintain its own authority. I thought it my duty to lay this complaint before your Lordships the very first opportunity that presented itself.

The CHIEF BARON.—If there is no motion, I don't see how the Court is to act.

Mr. DENMAN—Your Lordships will animadvert on the conduct of those who have infringed the order of the Court.

The LORD CHIEF BARON Who *are* those who have done so?

Mr. DENMAN—I thought it my duty to lay the matter before the Court,

The ATTORNEY GENERAL—I feel it to be duty to address a few words to your Lordship after what has been stated by my Learned Friend; but before I do so, I beg to intimate to your Lordship, that I man to follow my Learned Friend's example, in making no motion. What has been stated by Learned Friend, renders it incumbent on me, I think, (standing in the situation in which I do) to say a word or two to your Lordships upon this subject. Until within the last ten minutes, I had not seen any account of which has hitherto passed before this Court, or what purports to be an account of these proceedings. It does so happen that the Paper which my Learned Friend has alluded to, as calling for some expression of the displeasure of the Court, was put into my hand just before I came into Court, for the purpose of being brought under my notice. About ten minutes ago some person (I don't know who that person was) sent me one of the Newspapers which my Learned Friend alluded to—not the *Morning Chronicle*, but the *Courier*. That Paper I have seen, and I do lament, as much as my Learned Friend can possibly do, that any person should in any degree have violated the orders which your Lordships had promulgated on the first and second days of these proceedings; because it may tend to injure, though not prevent, the due administration of justice, by influencing, in some degree, the minds of the Jury. But I must beg leave to say, for myself, and for my Honourable and Learned Friends of Counsel for the Crown, (and I am quite sure I can say, — indeed I can undertake to say the same thing for every person who has any thing in the shape of an office under the Government) that we had no wish nor could we in any degree have wished that any thing should be stated to the public, of what passed here, until the whole can be stated fairly and properly. There is one phrase which my Learned Friend has used, which I could have wished had not escaped him, at which I confess I was much surprised, because it cannot but tend to prejudice the proceedings of the Court. My Learned Friend has talked of "Newspapers under the influence of Government." For myself I can only say, I know of no newspapers under the influence of Government— by whom employed or not employed. I know nothing of them, or of those by whom they are conducted. I know nothing of publications but as the sentiments of public writers upon public affairs. I know nothing of the paper alluded to by my Learned Friend, or of the persons by whom it is conducted. All I can say is, that whoever may the persons who conduct public newspapers on the one side or the other, who have violated the injunction of the Court, if they are brought, by proper affidavits, before your Lordship, distinctly proving them to have infringed your Lordship's order, I shall feel it to be my duty, without favour or partiality to the one side or the other, to submit such a motion as will put the authority of the Court in force; or if my Learned Friend can point out those who have violated the order of the Court, I shall cheerfully assist him now in bringing the parties within the power of your Lordships. I have not myself seen the paper which my Learned Friend has particularly named. I really know not of my own knowledge that the order has been infringed, but taking my Learned Friend's statement to be correct, I must concur with him in thinking, that the publication was extremely improper. If the order has been violated, I strongly protest against it, as highly improper and incorrect. My Learned Friend suggests, that one of the papers urges, as an excuse for its publication, that something like a professed account of the proceedings had been previously published another paper. I have not seen that professed account, but I can only say, that we have had no communication with the party making the publication, and that we are perfectly innocent of any thing in the shape of a publication; and, in fact, can have no desire to publish any part of these proceedings. No man can feel more, and no man can more strongly reprobate the conduct complained of; because the publication is extremely improper: even if it is correctly stated. It is very improper to publish the proceedings from time to time; because an impression may be made one way or the other; and such conduct tends, in my opinion, to obstruct the administration of justice. I have nothing more to say. I admit most fully with my Learned Friend, the impropriety of the conduct complained of; and I reprobate it as strongly as my friend can possibly do. I am extremely sorry it has been done, yet I am not disposed to believe that the infringement of the order arose from a desire to do that which is wrong. I do not impute to the editors of papers a motive of that sort— I have no doubt it arose from a desire to increase the sale of the newspapers which they conduct; but I do hope that, if Gentlemen are taking notes of the trials for publication, they will have the goodness to keep back those notes till the whole of the trials are finished. If, after this intimation, my Learned Friend will produce affidavits of any persons having again infringed the order, I shall feel it my duty to bring the conduct of such party under the notice of the Court.

`[TH: the above is very strange; like he planted the story and is denying it, but also explaining it and saying the original report (which he hadn't seen) as correct...]`

MR. DENMAN in reply—I fully acquit my Learned Friend, the Attorney General, and my other Learned Friend, of any intention, or any suspicion of having published, or having lent themselves to the publication of any part of the proceedings. All I can say is, that it will hardly be sufficient merely to promulgate an order; and I hope the Court will vindicate its privileges.

THE LORD CHIEF BARON— It is a very unfortunate and a very mischievous thing—mischievous in every mischievous to all sides. But all that we know of it is, that a newspaper is produced containing the account complained of. The Court cannot know who published these accounts, or who furnished the notes from which they were printed. These are matters of which we are entirely ignorant. The Attorney General has put the matter on its true grounds. If you cannot point out the parties, the Court cannot proceed.

Mr. Justice DALLAS—In the course of the proceedings on the trial of James Watson, at Westminster, a similar complaint was made against *The Observer* Sunday and Monday Newspaper. I recollect the circumstance perfectly well. A complaint was made against that Journal of having published part of the proceedings, notwithstanding the prohibition of the Court. Mr. Wetherell made that complaint, and my Lord Ellenborough said, "as you have announced that you do not mean to make any motion, the Court has nothing to do with hearing an address which is not to be followed by a motion. If you mean to move for an attachment, it must be founded upon affidavits. In conclusion, his Lordships says, "As there is no motion, it is not necessary to enter into it." Now, with respect to the complaint at present made, we have no fact whatever before us.— It is merely stated that a newspaper of a particular description has been published. That publication has drawn a production of another newspaper, but of this we know nothing. For myself I can say that I know nothing. A paper is produced, but by whom, or under what circumstances, is quite unknown to us. With respect to the allusion of one of these papers being under the influence of Government, I own I think it might have been spared, because it is an observation that may be of dangerous tendency; but of this I am persuaded, that the Government, or those who are appointed to conduct the affairs of Government, would be the first to bring to public justice those who improperly report the proceedings of Courts of Justice. At present there is no motion, or affidavit produced which can be the foundation of any motion. Therefore, pursuing the course adopted in the recent case, to which I have alluded, I think we ought to pass on to this trial.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002408/18171022/020/0003
Morning Herald (London)
Wednesday 22 October 1817

p3

THE KING V. WILLIAM TURNER.

Mr. Lowndes now proceeded in the usual form to intimate to the prisoner at the bar his right to challenge the Jury as they came to the book to be sworn; after which he called over the names of the Jurymen in the older in which they had been summoned. Two of the former Jury, who offered to serve again, were challenged for the prisoner, on whose behalf the following thirty-three were challenged.

Wm. White, of Inderidgehay, farmer.  
Robt. Beard, Dalbury, ditto  
Wm. Salt, ditto ditto  
John Heacock, Etwall, Esq.  
Wm. Bailey, ditto, farmer  
Thos. Archer, Hatton, ditto  
Thos. Orame, ditto, ditto  
Sam. Archer, Hallington, do.  
Thos. Hall, ditto, ditto  
Walthal Spurrier, ditto, ditto  
Robt. Wagstaff, ditto  
Wm. Bakewell, Sudbury, do.  
Thos. Hollis, ditto, ditto  
Luke Turner, ditto, ditto  
Henry Hall, Sutton, ditto  
Thus. Stratton, Tinsaley, do.  
Wm. Walker, ditto, ditto  
Rich. Spencer, Ashleyhay, do.  
Thos. Cooper, Atlow, ditto

John Moorcroft, Boylestone, maltster  
J. Hurley. Edvoston, farmer  
William Brigg, Alvaston and Boultun ditto  
Richard Buxton, Clifton, ditto  
Wm. Levern, Elvastun, ditto  
Robert Briggs, ditto  
R. Pickering, Markeaton, do.  
T. Lowndes, Marston Montgomery, farmer  
John Bradshaw, Osbiston and Thiervaston, ditto  
Robert Shipton,_Scropton, do.  
John Stretton, ditto, ditto  
Robert Steeple, ditto  
John Skevington, Yeaveley  
W. Berresford, Snelston, gent.  
Solomon Frost, ditto, farmer

The following Jury (of whom some were challenged for Brandreth) was at length sworn—

Thos. Ensor, Marston on Dove, farmer
Henry Spurrier, ditto, ditto.  
M. Goodall, Marston Montgomery, farmer  
Thomas Hall, Sutton, ditto.  
Sam. Dean, Ashleyhay, ditto.

J. Wagstaff, Atlave, ditto  
Jos. Wheeldon, Alvaston, do.  
James Osborne, ditto, ditto.  
T. Crumpton, Darley Abbey, gt.  
J, Glover, Findern, farmer.  
J[?]. Haslam, Lit. Chester, ditto.  
T. Ordish, Mickleover, ditto.

As in the former case, the indictment was read over to the Jury by the CLerk of Assize, as containing the charges upon which the prisoner was to take his trial.

Mr. BALGUAY, as Junior Counsel, then opened the case—After which the SOLICITOR GENERAL addressed the Jury, taking the same course adopted by the Attorney General in the former Trial. The Learned Gentleman spoke for one hour and a quarter.

Witnesses were then called, and examined by the Counsel for the Crown, in their turn, commencing with Mr. Sergeant Vaughan.

The witnesses called were— Anthony Martin, Shirley Asherry, Thomas Turner, Henry Tomlinson, Elijah Hall, sen. Elijah Hall, jun. Isaac Walker, Mary Epworth, Joseph Wilkinson, Samuel Fletcher, William Shipman, Henry Hole, Wm. Booth, and Wm. Storer.

After the examination of some other witnesses, the Court adjourned till eight o'clock to-morrow morning.

Many of the prisoners are of respectable connexions, and some of them have relations even in this town. It is a melancholy circumstance to relate, that the sister of one of them, named Hunt, a respectable milliner and dress-maker residing in Queen-street here, expired, last week, of a broken heart, occasioned by the horror which occupied her mind ever since she first learned that her unfortunate brother was one of the persons indicted for High Treason. This young man is of a respectable family, and spent a very considerable part of his life here previous to his apprehension. His unhappy sister was interred, on Saturday last, and her untimely and melancholy death is universally lamented.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002408/18171022/020/0003#
Morning Herald (London)
Wednesday 22 October 1817
p3

BRANDRETH.

Brandreth was yesterday afternoon visited by the Chaplain of the gaol, to whose religious admonitions he was extremely attentive. His conduct since his conviction, as well indeed as before, has been decorous and correct. This morning, on the prisoners being brought down from their cells, several of them, among whom were Brandreth and the Ludlams, proceeded to perform their Religious duties, and remained in devout prayer for some time. These men, as well as the rest of their associates, have behaved, ever since their confinement with the utmost propriety; Brandreth has a wife and three children, and from a letter which he has written to his wife, it appears that she is now pregnant of a fourth. We have subjoined a copy of the letter in question, to the publication of which the prisoner has said that he has no objection. All his desires now seem to be centered in the happiness and future prosperity of his family, for whose sake he has expressed a wish to raise a little sum of money. Persons who view, with proper sentiments, the crime of which the prisoner has been found guilty—but who, at the same time, regard the sentence which he is about to endure with the feelings of humanity, have contributed in a small degree to his desires, for which the wretched man has expressed himself most grateful.

The following is a literal copy of his letter, which as it shews the spirit of humility by which he is at present actuated, and can produce no mischief, but may have a different effect upon the minds of those who, like him, may have departed from the paths of Religion, we have no hesitation in giving it to our readers.

Derby Gaol, Oct. 18, 1817.  
My dearly beloved Wife,—At last I thought it my duty to write a few lines to you, which I am sure will affect you very much, to inform you of my dreadful situation; but I hope GOD be your friend—and if you will by Prayer appeal to God, you will undoubtedly find great consolation and relief for your distress, and as a husband and father let me entreat you that you will act a motherly part to the poor fatherless children, and bring them up in the fear of God, which is my most sincere desire, and likewise conduct yourself in an undeniable manner, as an example to the children to the love and fear of God, in the faith of JESUS CHRIST that you may never depart from that faith in Christ; and I wish for the convincing of all the souls in the house, that they may be at the arrival of this, and that we may all meet in Heaven, where trouble ceases and all is joy and glory! And I pray to GOD may this fatal stroke be joy to all that belong to me, instead of sorrow. Oh! that I may be the cause of their holy salvation —may it penetrate each wounded heart, so as to be their sole conversion to God. My dear, you may suppose my feelings are not easily to be described. At this time the Sentence is not passed, but I am found guilty by the Jury this day. My dear wife, it would give me great consolation if I could see you before I depart from this life; but my dear, if you are pregnant, I would have you advise with your poor distressed mother in law, whether it would be proper or not, and if she thinks it would not be of serious consequence, I should be very glad, but let it be well considered before you come to me, and if you do not come, let your father (if he thinks it would not be more than he can bear) as I know he is of a very timorous turn; but if he, neither, comes, I shall write again, it God permit me. —So my beloved wife, I hope you will excuse my short letter at this time. You may inform all friends that Goo gave me great fortitude to bear up my spirits on trial.—So I hope the bellings of God will be with you all, and most especially with you and our poor little babes.—So I conclude  
Your most affectionate Husband,  
JEREMIAH BRANDRETH.
For Ann Brandreth, Geo. Bridget's, Bedlam-court, Sutton in Ashfield.
