
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18121031/009/0003
Morning Chronicle - Saturday 31 October 1812

During the last week four *Luddites* have passed through Leeds on their way to York Castle. On Saturday se'nnight, at night, four villains attacked the house of Mr. Joseph Hirst, of Lepton, clothier, one of whom fired at Mr. Hirst's son, and the ball grazed the top of his head, passing through his hat.

## October 1817, Pentrich trial


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000082/18171014/002/0002?browse=true
Morning Chronicle - Tuesday 14 October 1817
TO THE EARL OF LIVERPOOL

My LORD, Oct. 10, 1817.

To those who have carefully perused the indictment of the *forty-eight* men who are to be tried for *High Treason* on the 15th of this month, at *Derby*, it must not be matter of some surprise that Ministers, after the issues of their late political adventures in the Courts of Justice, should once more endeavour, on similar grounds, to make out a case of high treason against the whole people of Great Britain, as a justification of having deprived them of the benefit of the constitution and the protection of the law.

That the aforesaid *forty-eight* men may have committed an atrocious riot, that acts of violence and robbery may have been among the consequences, and that even murder may have been committed, is all very possible-although I see not a word in the indictment respecting a foul murder said, on very good authority, to have been committed; while it is repeatedly set forth, that the rioters came forth "with intent to attack, fight with, kill and destroy the soldiers, troops and forces of our Lord the King;" in order "to subvert and destroy the Government and Constitution."

Now, my Lord, recollecting that "our Lord the King" has an army of one hundred and forty-nine thousand veterans, commanded by officers oF the highest gallantry and greatest skill, we naturally inquire, who are these *forty-eight* men, what their connections, and what the means in possession or prospect whereby they were to carry into execution the enterprise stated in the indictment? and that document describes them as follows, namely, one *tailor*-one *swyer*-one *blacksmith*-one *farmer*-one *stone-getter*- two *stone-masons*- and *forty-one labourers* !-It is true that we are there told of five hundred and upwards who joined in the tumult. But does not our common sense revolt at seeing in such a tumultuary proceeding a scheme for subverting the Government?

Why, my Lord, are not these men tried for their *real* and *visible* crimes, if, as reported, of much atrocity? Is not the law in our too well-known criminal code sufficiently strong to punish them? But why, through the sides of these *forty-eight* rioters, is an attempt to be made to justify the punishment which, on mere green bag *imputations*, has actually been and continues to be inflicted on the whole people of Great Britain by the functionaries who administer the government?

As an "intent to subvert and destroy the Government and Constitution" is the grand, but as yet the merely *imputed* and *invisible* crime charged on the Derbyshire *tailor* and his companions, will not the people be apt to ask-'Who are their prosecutors ?- Who are they who have taken away the protection of the law, and even *suspended* the Constitution ?-Is not the a constitution *suspended*, a constitution *subverted* and *destroyed*?— Is it not an insult to the understanding of a nation to tell them they have a constitution, and at the same time to say, the functionaries who in trust administer the government have a right at any time, and for what length of time, and as often as they please, to *suspend* that constitution ?-Are men who have done all this the prosecutors of the Derbyshire *tailor* and his riotous companions, on a charge of *intending* "to subvert and destroy the government and constitution?"'

Suppose, my Lord, that by inference piled on inference, interpretation tacked to interpretation, construction coupled with construction, a plain Derbyshire Jury should be so puzzled and confounded by the metaphysical distinctions and law fictions of the ten or twelve learned Barristers who it is said are retained by the Crown against the prisoners, as to be unable to distinguish what is from what is not a treason, so explained as to be incomprehensible, and should such Jury be thereby moved and induced by the instigation of the many gentlemen of the long robe to find a verdict of guilty, your Lordship will recollect that another verdict will remain to be given before the nation will be satisfied-namely, the verdict of dispassionate reason at the bar of the public.

When it is an obvious object of great interest to Ministers, that these *forty-eight* men, or some one or more of them, should be found "Guilty", that some colour may be given to that accusation against the whole people of Great Britain as traitorously inclined, on which they have been deprived of the protection of law, and their constitution has been taken from them, your Lordship may rest assured, that a mere superficial unfounded verdict of guilty against these *forty-eight* rioters, would not, at the bar of the public, be taken as a proof of that crime on the part of the people, for which they have been, and continue to be, punished as aforesaid.

As a person convicted of high treason is not only to suffer an ignominious, but a cruel death; so a proof of that uncommon crime ought not to depend on slippery inferences and suppositions, but to be so plain and palpable that no man of sense could doubt it. A proof by construction hanging on construction, savours too much of the ludicrous reasonings of the adepts of *derivation*.

In the way of ridicule your Lordship may have see heard "Pickled cucumber" thus derived from "Jeremiah King."-" Jeremiah King"-" Jerry King"-"Jerkin"-" Girking"-" Pickled cucumber." Let us hope that nothing so ludicrous will be played off at *Derby*, for deriving high treason from a licentious tumult of a misguided, stupid rabble!

Among other inferences in the indictment, is this; that because the rioters robbed some houses of *arms*, ergo, it was with intent first, to conquer the army; secondly, to kill the King; and thirdly, to subvert to and destroy the government; but what Lawyer when indicting for burglary a man, who had first stolen the pistols of the owner of the house broken into, and then actually killed him, ever inferred that the burglar had thereby proved by overt act his intent to subdue the army; to kill the King and subvert the State? and yet a house is a component part of a country; and a man, an individual of that aggregate, we call the nation the community or state.

Touching that part of the indictment, my Lord, which *accounts* for the depravity of mind-the seat of so *intention*, which constitutes *crime*,-it is said that the *tailor* and his companions were "*moved and seduced in by the instigation of the Devil*" to do as they did. This I take to be a fact; because I have been credibly informed, that a *Devil* in human shape was particularly active in the work of *seduction* and *instigation*.

If this were the case, and if this *Devil* was not of the in number of "those other false traitors, whose names are to the Jurors unknown," but was equally known to Jurors and prosecutors, as in crime he stood pre-eminent, so in the indictment he ought to have been placed foremost.

A *Devil* always critically considers the circumstances and desires, the weaknesses and interests of those he tempts or deludes; and if he be a subordinate *Devil*, doing the work of superiors, he is equally studious of their interests and wishes. Supposing, therefore, the fact set forth in the indictment, that the prisoners were "moved and seduced by the instigation of the *Devil*," we have to consider in what way the *Devil* there alluded to would naturally go to work.

Ever keeping in view the grand object of his employers, would he not affect to hold them in particular hatred and contempt? and, well knowing the poverty and misery or those he addressed, would he not endeavour to persuade them, that by acting on his *information* and advice their misery would soon be at an end, and their condition be greatly bettered? Would he not attribute their past sufferings to unnecessary wars, to an extravagant expenditure, profligate jobs, sinecures, pensions, and the long et cetera of corruption; as *Devils* themselves always speak as much truth as necessary for obtaining credit to the falsehoods in reserve?

Would he not display great knowledge and eloquence on all the abominations of the borough system? and then slide into a transition on Parliamentary Reform, and the unavailing petitioning against that borough evil? Would he not praise to the skies the leaders in this reform, profess to be in their bosom confidence, and insinuate that he himself was not only a patriot of the first order, but of the most determined character?

Would he not artfully suggest ideas of measures, by which the crafty and vicious among them might foresee the means of robbing their neighbours, while pretending to serve the public? And for betraying his dupes into the snares prepared for them, would he not at the same time flatter and cajole them by appealing to their ignorance on the true means of resisting tyranny?

Would he fail to cite our greatest writers to shew, not only the lawfulness but the duty of such resistance? And would he not take especial care to quote the learned Blackstone, to shew that resistance to Kings and Rulers is "necessary, when the contracts of Society are in danger of dissolution, and the law proves too weak a defence against the violence of power and oppression?"

Having thus, by the doctrines of truth and common sense, prepared his pupils for the trap he had in readiness, would he not first expatiate on the *prudence* with which resistance by arms ought ever to be accompanied, and then affect to let them into the important secret that the proper moment had arrived? And would he not proceed to assure them, that every thing was completely ripe for recovering their rights and redressing their grievances. by a general rising of the nation; and express his surprise that they should be in ignorance of so important a truth? Would he not here detail all the necessary particulars, assuring them that on certain previous movements, intended for signals, the people of the metropolis and of all the most populous parts of the country, would burst forth on a sudden with proper leaders at their head; that the army was ready to join them; and that as the object of the union was to restore the constitution, it would therefore be the duty of all to join, in so good a work; and that then, having the strength of the nation on their side, the part he recommended was the dictate of *prudence* as well as patriotism?

If, my Lord, the Derbyshire *tailor*, the *sawyer*, the *blacksmith*, and their companions, were thus "moved and seduced by the instigation of the Devil" in question; and if they really believed that such was the sentiment of a great majority of the nation, and such the duty of men who loved their country and its Constitution, you must widely differ from *Blackstone*, from *Locke*, from the *Runnymead Barons*, the Author of the *Bill of Rights*, the *Act of Settlement*, and that *constellation great men* who effected the *glorious Revolution* that opened the way to the throne for the present family, if you should. not think it very difficult to denominate the misconduct of those deluded persons' treason; but perfectly certain that the conduct of their seducer was perfectly diabolical.

Your father, my Lord, has told us that "the Constitution of every free Government is subject, from time to time, to a sort of dangerous crisis, which demands the attention of all who are concerned for its preseravation." "If the Constitution is only through age impaired, *it must be called back to its first principles*.— The history of this country abounds with more of these critical periods than any other; and it is owing to the proper use our ancestors made of them, that our Government has long been advancing by various steps to perfection; they withstood the repeated attempts both of Papal innovation and regal oppression; and though their struggles frequently produced violent fevers in the State, *yet the Constitution always came forth in more perfect health*, and some new security was obtained for our freedom."

FITZWILLIAM

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000082/18171018/004/0002?browse=true
Morning Chronicle - Saturday 18 October 1817

We would willingly persuade ourselves that there can be but one feeling among men of all parties in the country, as to the line of conduct which his Majesty's Ministers are pursuing, with respect to those unfortunate individuals now under trial for the highest crime known in our law. A demi-official Journal (*The Courier*), which receives its instructions daily from Government, in the very outset of the trials, publishes accounts, received in all probability from a public office, in which the cause of the prisoners is not merely prejudged, but every endeavour is made to inflame the public mind aganist [sic] them, and to draw down on their heads the execration of their fellow-citizens. The course adopted on this occasion, is, we believe, without a parallel in the History of our Judicature. The prisoners, it is said, in *The Courier* of Thursday, are the "*unfortunate men, who by a series of the most wanton and outrageous acts, on the 9th of June last, threw this and the adjoining county into a state of the utmost terror and alarm.*"

In a subsequent part of the article it is said:—
Among the leaders, and one who stands charged with an act of peculiar depravity, we mean that of having shot a poor fellow, a servant to Mr. HEPWORTH, of South Wingfield, is a man named JEREMIAH BRANDRETH, alias Nottingham Captain. This man, who previous to the commission of the crime imputed to him, always wore large bushy whiskers, immediately after that event, had his face shaved close; but since his commitment, he has suffered his beard to grow to an enormous length; his appearance, in consequence, is terrific, but he says he has cogent reasons for his determination. He keeps aloof from all the other men, and says he knows nothing of them; and what is more singular, he has even pronounced his wife a lunatic for presuming to claim acquaintance, and denies all knowledge of those friends who recognise him, or seem to have a knowledge of his person: he wishes it to be believed, in fact, that he is not himself.

"It appears that many of the prisoners were soldiers, who, after having fought the battles of their country, had received their discharges, and had returned to their former occupations. Others too had received instruction in military discipline as members of the Local Militia, and thus it has been their boast, that they were as competent to take the field as any of his Majesty's forces. Two or three of them are well known political leaders, and one, whose name, for reasons which will be obvious to our readers, we do not mention, was obliged to leave the country years back, for practices somewhat similar to those with which be now stands accused. The lives of the whole of this man's family, including two nephews and other relatives, have, by his incitement, been placed in jeopardy."

But perhaps the most wicked and mischievous part of the whole is the attempt to influence the public by appealing to their fears, and presenting pictures of combinations and confederacies, as actually existing in the place where these trials are going on, which, whether true or exaggerated, or false (for as our business is not, at present, with their truth or falsehood, we will not stop to inquire into it), ought, in mercy, to have been reserved for another occasion.

"It is'a singular, as well as an important fact, to be known, that the whole labouring population of this town are so connected by means of clubs and societies of various descriptions, as to be in constant communication with each other; and so systematic are their arrangements, that they might be all called out and brought to act in a body in twenty minutes' time. To effect this object, and for purposes which it is unnecessary to examine, the town has been divided into districts, each district being under the supervision of two leaders, who are personally acquainted with the residence of the members of his party.— These leaders assembling at a given spot, and receiving orders to collect their forces, would instantly disperse to their several districts, and thus, with perfect facility, collect some thousands of active men at a very short notice. The same plans are adopted at Nottingham, and in other manufacturing towns, where great bodies of the people are assembled."

That no means might be left untried for exciting an odium against the prisoners, Religion is next appealed to:—

"It is also a remarkable circumstance, and affords an additional proof of the necessity of a watchful vigilance on the part of the police of the country, that places of religious worship have been chosen for the assemblage of the friends of sedition, as a cloak to their mischievous designs, and as a more certain mode of disguising their real intentions. This fact has been established by the admission of several of the accused."

What! is Government not satisfied with the advantages it has obtained over these poor wretches in having secured before hand no less than ten Counsel, among whom are several of the most eminent advocates in the country, and all the Barristers on the Circuit, with the solitary exception of Mr. DENMAN, but it must resort to such unfair means of obtaining the accomplishment of the object which it has so much at heart.

And what does *The Courier* say in justification of its conduct on this occasion? Why, forsooth, that the papers that blame it, published the Bill of Indictment against the prisoners at full length. But, good heavens! what affinity is there between publishing a part of the proceedings; and this most unjustifiable mode of sitting in judgment on the prisoners, boldly pronouncing them guilty of the crimes laid to their charge, and mixing the whole up with the mass of inflammatory matter from which we have only selected a few specimens! When a newspaper publishes an account of any law proceeding, common justice requires that that account should be strictly confined to what actually takes place in Court. Whether the proceedings of a trial may with propriety be published from day to day, or whether the whole ought to be reserved till its conclusion, is a question which different persons may be inclined to decide differently. In. this case, the Judges have decided, that no part of the proceedings are to be published till the conclusion of the trial, and we bow to, their decision. We cannot, indeed, see that the cause of the Prisoners can be much prejudiced by publication of the proceedings from day to day. When a speech of the ATTORNEY GENERAL, for instance, is given, the public always bear in mind it is the speech of one party, and before they make up their mind wait till they hear the evidence and the corresponding statements of the other party. But here, while the public are precluded from any knowledge of the actual proceedings, this Government Paper, availing itself of the faith which is generally reposed in the impartiality of Newspaper Reports of Law Proceedings, collects together the result of the accumulated labours of spies, informers, and other agents of a similar description employed by Government, and endeavours by means of it to poison the public mind, to excite a horror against the unfortunate prisoners, and to prevent them from receiving that fair trial to which they are entitled by the laws and practice of their country.

The manner in which *The Courier* of yesterday endeavoured to evade the prohibition to publish the proceedings is one of the most barefaced attempts to treat with contempt an order of a Court which we ever witnessed. Under the thin pretence of giving "a short detail of the circumstances under which the present prosecution is instituted— which the publications of the period when the outrages imputed to the prisoner were committed, enable us to do without infringing the order of the Court," after stating that the ATTORNEY GENERAL addressed the Jury, and in a speech of great length, perspicuity, and eloquence, entered into an account of the law as respected the particular case in question, and of the acts imputed to the prisoner to which that law applied, it gives such an opening statement, as the ATTORNEY GENERAL might be supposed to make, and to leave no doubt on the minds of its readers that this was the substance of the ATTORNEY GENERAL'S speech, it adds at the conclusion :-" This is the story of the plot. The ATTORNEY GENERAL, of course, stated it much more at large, and with colouring, connecting the prisoner in it."— Now, the cruelty of this manner of proceeding is, that the accusation goes forth to the world, followed by no part of the defence, for no one can pretend that he found the defence in publications already before the public. After this, the Order of a Court of Law is a mockery. The statement having gone forth to the world, we have thought it our duty to lay before the public an abstract of what the ATTORNEY-GENERAL actually did say on the occasion.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000082/18171018/004/0003?browse=true
Morning Chronicle - Saturday 18 October 1817

STATE TRIALS.

DERBY, THURSDAY EVENING.

In consequence of an understanding that the Law Officers of the Crown had determined on putting Jeremiah Brandreth first on his trial, that prisoner was this morning conveyed to the County Hall, handcuffed for greater security to Mr. Eaton, the Jailor's brother. There was nothing remarkable on the part of the populace as he passed through the streets. Neither in his case, nor in that of the other parties included in the indictment, is the question at issue taken up generally as a political question. Nothing of the feeling lately excited in London can be traced. The prisoners have never been cheered on their removal from one place to another, and the few who follow them seem only animated by that curiosity which ever prompts the multitude to see those of whom they hear any thing extraordinary.

The Court having met at nine o'clock, the names of the Jury were called over.

The ATTORNEY-GENERAL then announced it to be his intention to proceed first with the trial of Jeremiah Brandreth, who was immediately placed at the Bar, and informed by the Crier, that he had a right to challenge the Jurors, to whom he might have any objection to urge.

The challenges were then proceeded with. These occupied the Court till near twelve o'clock, when the following Jury were sworn :-

William Wilkes, of Church Broughton, farmer.  
John Stretton, ditto, ditto.  
R. Frost, of Duffield, farmer.  
Thomas Tempest, of Burley, farmer.  
Samuel Wilder, of Barnaston.  
Thomas Archer, of Hatton, farmer.  
Thomas Gilman.  
Thomas Sherwin, of Osmaston.  
Thomas Gilbert, ditto.  
Harry Yates, of Sapperton.  
John Oakden, of Yeoveley.  
John Adsetts, of Shottle and Postern.

The challenges were many, but not so numerous as in the case of Watson.

On the oath being administered to a Mr. Shifton before he kissed the book, but after the whole of it had been dictated to him by the Officer, he was challenged by the Counsel for the Prisoner.

The ATTORNEY GENERAL denied that the prisoner had the right of challenging after the whole of the words had come out of the mouth of the Officer.

On this question a long discussion took place. The Counsel on both sides having been heard.

The CHIEF BARON declared it to be his opinion, that the prisoner ought to challenge before the oath was begun to be administered. The oath being from beginning to end one entire thing, ought not to be interrupted, and therefore if the challenge were not made before the oath was proposed, it ought to be understood it was not the intention of the prisoner to challenge at all.

In this opinion the other Judges severally concurred, and each stated the reasons on which he came to this decision.

The Juror who had been challenged was withdrawn.

INTERDICT AGAINST PUBLISHING THE TRIALS.

The CHIEF BARON wished it now to be understood, that, with the concurrence of the Court, he now repeated the caution which he had given yesterday. It was expected that no part of the trial now pending, or of any future trial, would be published till the whole of the proceedings should be concluded. If, for the second time, this notice was not attended to, the Court must use its authority to bring the delinquent to punishment; he, however, trusted there would be no occasion for any farther measures to be taken.

The witnesses on both sides were ordered to withdraw.

[In consequence of *The Courier* of last night giving a statement affecting to be an abstract of the ATTORNEY GENERAL's speech, we feel ourselves compelled to give an abstract from our own Reporters. The evidence, we in compliance with the desire of the Court, abstain from publishing].

MR. BALGUY opened the case in a short speech, setting forth the several counts in the indictment.

The ATTORNEY-GENERAL stated to the Jury, that they were placed in the box, where they then sat, to perform a most solemn and important duty; to decide on the guilt or innocence of a fellow-creature, charged with the highest crime which any member of society could commit. Other offences of great atrocity were frequently submitted to the decision of a Jury; but these fell far short in enormity of the crime of High Treason. He solemnly declared that it would be his object now to state correctly the law applicable to the present case, and fairly to detail the facts which he proposed to prove by evidence. It was fortunate for him, that in stating the law, he should speak under the correction of the Judges; and he wished the Jury always to remember that it was from their Lordships on the Bench that they were to take the law, and not from the Counsel on one side or the other. He then described the counts in the indictment, and shewed that the acts charged in them were made High Treason by various statutes. By the 25th of Edward the Third, it had been made High Treason to "compass the death of the King," and by compass, he contended, was not meant to accomplish. In law, the word "compass," was not held to have the same meaning that it had in common language; for a person saying, "I have 'compassed' my design," was understood to assert, that he had effected it. To "compass" the death of the King, meant, in law, to, imagine or to intend the commission of the crime. Such design was proved by levying war against the King, and hostile meetings of persons, with or without arms (it was fit he should particularly state this), for the purpose of effecting some general purpose, was in the eye of the law High Treason, even though the actual object of the parties were not to effect the overthrow of the Constitution. On the authority of Mr. Justice Forster, he contended that all combinations to break down enclosures - to force open prisons - to destroy property, or to compel the King to change his measures, were a levying of war against the King, and of course High Treason. He should now proceed to state the facts of the case, and leave the jury to decide what fair inference was to be drawn from the acts that had been committed, and from the declarations which would be proved to have accompanied them. The prisoner at the bar might not have been present at many of the outrages which had occurred, but he should introduce him to the Jury as having been present at that assemblage, which he considered to form the most prominent feature of the late insurrection. It would be observed, that in the indictment the prisoner was described as the *Nottingham Captain*. That he was so called, proved the nature of the transactions in which he had been engaged; and it would be shewn, that not only a rising in that county had been contemplated, but a general insurrection throughout the kingdom. Part of the force provided to effect the designs of the conspirators was raised in Derbyshire, and other parts of it were to come from different places, and in particular from Nottingham. Nottingham Forest was the place appointed for a general rendezvous on the night of the 9th June. It would be proved that on the 8th Brandreth was at Pentridge, where he went to receive the insurgents, and to point out the course which they ought to pursue, in order to effect a Revolution, and to wipe off (such was their own phrase) the Government of the country, through the medium of hostile force. On the day mentioned, Brandreth went to a public-house at Pentridge, kept by a woman of the name of Weightman (mother to one of the prisoners), called the White Horse. He there met other Conspirators - pointed out to them from a plan of the country what ought to be done to ensure success, and described the different places in which he expected risings of the people would take place to join them, when what they called their "grand army" should be formed. He (the Attorney-General) cared not whether the representations made on the subject of the co-operations to be expected from other parts were false or true. Whatever these might be, Brandreth was exerting himself to stir up his fellow-citizens to rebellion, and his guilt was as great in the one case as in the other. He would shew that the prisoner had presided at the meeting of which he had spoken; that he came from Nottingham to lead the conspirators; that he did lead them; that he sat among them as their leader, and took upon himself the functions of Generalissimo, as directly as ever any General of a regular army had done. There were several villages in the neighbourhood of Pentridge, from which the Insurgents expected to be joined by considerable numbers. Brandreth and George Weightman came from Nottingham, to meet those who were expected to rise against the Government. They went, accompanied by another man, Hunt's Barn, at Southwingfield, where they met some of those whom they sought, armed with muskets and pikes. Not only did they find armed conspirators ready to join them here, but at Hunt's Barn they found a supply of arms provided for those who were disposed to engage in the insurrection. Thence they proceeded to a place called Thompson's Close. It was their object to procure a further supply of arms, by proceeding from house to house wherever they knew the owner to have a gun. They did this, and compelled those who had arms, to give them up. One of the rights of Englishmen, claimed for the people of this country at the glorious Revolution of 1688, was this — that every man should be allowed to keep arms for his own defence. Little did the wise men of that day, when standing up for that right, in order to protect the subject against arbitrary power, imagine that they were putting into the hands of such men as Brandreth, and his accomplices, the means of taking arms by force from their lawful owners, in order to turn then against the Government and Constitution of their country. But this was not all; not content with taking arms forcibly from those who would have scorned to use them, in furtherance of the objects they had in view, they endeavoured to press the owners themselves into the service. If a man could not go with them himself, his son must go; and if he had no son, his servant must accompany them. Their object was to obtain a man and a gun from every house. Disappointed in their expectations of meeting a party they had expected to join them at Thompson's-close, Geo. Weightman was sent towards Pentridge to ascertain the cause of the delay. Brandreth afterwards marched to the house of Mr. Elijah Hall. Here having demanded a gun, they also demanded one of his sons. Mr. Hall's son was extremely reluctant to go, but he was so threattened with their vengeance if he did not consent to accompany them, that he (the Attorney-General) did not wonder that in the end he should go with them. This person, however, returned to his home as soon as he could, and he (the Attorney-General) was glad for the purposes of justice, that Mr. Hall had been compelled to go, as through that circumstance he had had an opportunity of witnessing their proceedings, and thus evidence of them would be obtained from a witness, he could confidently say it, as honest and as uncontaminated as any man in that Court. Mr. Hall was forced to accompany them; and in their progress the Insurgents next came to the house of a Mr. Walker, where they demanded a gun. Mr. Walker was as unwilling to comply as Mr. Hall had been; but the gun was, from necessity, given up. Some one of the party knew that Mr. Walker had pistols, and these also were demanded. Mr. Walker, at first, denied that he had any; he then remonstrated with them on the injustice of taking his pistols from him, as well as his musket; but was forced, in the end, to comply. The pistols were taken by Brandreth, and he immediately stuck them in his belt. That which served him for a belt was a white apron which he that day wore, tucked close round his body. From Mr. Walker's the conspirators went to the house of a Mr. Bestwick, and thence to that of a person of the name of Hepworth, and here murder was committed. Before he enlarged on this fact, he begged most solemnly to disclaim any wish that the prisoner at the bar should be found guilty of High Treason, because he had committed a murder. Arriving at the house of Mrs. Hepworth, they knocked at the door, and demanded to be supplied with guns and pistols. She with a courage that did not always belong to her sex, refused to open the door. Brandreth went round the house, and at last saw a man-servant through the kitchen window, who was then drawing on his half boots. The prisoner broke the window, and fired at the servant, who received the shot in his shoulder, and of this wound he died. Fire-arms were then obtained from the house of Mrs. Hepworth; and the conspirators went on to other houses; and when resistance was offered-, Brandreth held up *in terrorem* the act of atrocity which he had committed, exclaiming, "I have shot one man already, and I will shoot you if you refuse compliance." It would hence be seen, that he had in a manner gloried in the action, and used it as an argument to induce others to join with him and his accomplices, in the insurrection. Having visited in a similar way several other houses, they proceeded to a place called Greenwich, where many of the party finding the country was not so ripe for a revolution as they had expected it would be, began to be frightened. George Weightman in this state of things, was sent on, to see if the Nottingham men were coming towards Pentridge. He took a poney from Mr. Booth's stable, and proceeded on this errand. Brandreth in the mean time assumed the command of those who came from South Wingfield, Ripley, and other places in that neighbourhood. He acted as leader or captain, and others served under him as inferior officers, to pick up stragglers, and keep the party together, many of whom having been forced from their homes were anxious to get away. Those who wished to go, it would be seen, the prisoner had pushed back into the ranks, and threatened to shoot them if they attempted to escape. At the different places to which they directed their steps, Brandreth repeatedly declared that a revolution, and the overturning of the Government, were the objects which he and his companions had in view. George Weightman returned, held a private conversation with Brandreth, after which he rode up to the other conspirators, and told them that every thing was going on right - that the soldiers would not leave their barracks, and that it was desirable for them to advance towards Nottingham as fast as they could. They marched on; but finding that they were not joined by those they expected, many began to drop off; and at Eastwood, on a report that the yeomanry were coming, the whole body began to disperse. While these things were passing, between nine and ten o'clock on Monday night, and nine and ten o'clock of the following morning, great agitation was observed in the town of Nottingham, and many men were found in the forest, who, it was beyond all doubt, had repaired there for the purpose of joining those who were expected to advance from Pentridge. It would be proved that Brandreth had been styled the Nottingham Captain, and that he had acted as Commander; his person would be identified, though his present appearance was very different from what it had been at the time of the insurrection, as he had not that length of beard then which he had now, and which he understood him to have obstinately retained. His dress, too, was different; but if he thought these things would prevent him from being recognized, he (the Att. Gen.) would tell him he thought he would find himself mistaken. The facts which he had thus stated, he contended, would, if proved, constitute a levying of war against the King, or he did not know what levying war was. What answer would be given to the charge he knew not. He did not know whether it would be attempted to alter the character of the acts committed, or whether the Counsel on the other side would try to prove that Brandreth was not concerned with them. He could not conceive that they would succeed in doing either, but if, contrary to his expectation, they could shew that the prisoner was innocent, he, for one, should rejoice in his acquittal.

The first witness was then called.

*Anthony Marten* was examined by the Solicitor-General, and cross-examined by Mr. Cross. *Shirley Ashbury*, examined by Mr. Serjeant Vaughan, cross-examined by Mr. Denman, and re-examined by Mr. Serjeant Vaughan. The other witnesses examined were, *James Shipman*, *Thomas Turner*, *Henry Tomlinson*, and *Elijah Hall*. The Court adjourned at six o'clock till eight to-morrow morning.

DISTURBANCE AT THE DERBY THEATRE.

Wednesday night the Theatre of this town was crowded in every part, to witness the performance of Mr. BOOTH, who is engaged for three nights. The bills for the night announced for representation *The Iron Chest*, the part of *Sir Edward Mortimer* by Mr. BOOTH, and the farce of *What Next?* In the interval between the conclusion of the play and the commencement of the afterpiece, several of the auditory in the boxes called for *God save the King*, which the Orchestra immediately began to play. The gallery, which was crowded by the lower and working classes of people, expressed some opposition by hissing, groaning, kicking against the seats, and crying out, "Britons go free." These symptoms of violence were instantly overwhelmed by an unanimous thunder of applause from the boxes and pit, the visitors having simultaneously stood up, (the gentlemen with their hats off), when this celebrated air commenced; a mutual emulation between the respectable part of the auditory and the gallery ensued, and continued for some time, the former manifesting decided approbation, and the latter tumultuous opposition . At length the boxes and pit triumphed— the loyal anthem was played with the usual demonstrations of respect from the respectable and well-affected part of the company. But at the conclusion the *higher* class of gentry in the gallery joined a chorus of groaning, which continued for some time, until completely silenced by the other parts of the house. The remainder of the performance went on in quietness, and at an early hour the auditory retired to their respective habitations.



---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18171015/009/0003

Morning Chronicle - Wednesday 15 October 1817

TRIALS FOR HIGH TREASON.

DERBY, TUESDAY MORNING.

The State Trials, which come on this week, and which were expected to begin on Wednesday, will not commence till Thursday. The former day will be occupied in calling over the Grand Jurors whom it is necessary to assemble on the occasion of a Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, and in going over the names of the Petty Jurors summoned in the same way. In addition to the overt acts set forth in the indictment we understand murder is charged to have been committed. The person against whom this accusation is principally directed is Jeremiah Brandreth. The list of witnesses for the Crown comprehends no fewer than 240 names. Of these several are accomplices, and from this circumstance it is inferred that the cross-examinations will extend to a considerable length. Some difficulty has arisen as to the course fittest to be pursued in a case like the present. On former occasions the prisoners of have been tried singly or collectively. To take the latter course— to put between 40 and 50 persons on their trial at once, would be attended with much inconvenience; and to give every individual a separate trial, may be found equally open to objections, though of an opposite character. In this situation of things, the Law Officers are understood to have determined on making a selection of those against whom the evidence is most conclusive.

To this legal novelty, however, it is probable that considerable opposition will be given by the Counsel for the accused, as they are stated to be of opinion the acts of the individuals thus distinguished, will be likely to receive a colouring, which would not attach to them, viewed in connection with all the proceedings of those with whom they have been concerned. Many of the prisoners are very young, and in the lowest situations of life. The whole of them, or nearly the whole of them, are spoken of as being extremely illiterate. Brandreth, the person accused of the murder, had latterly deported himself in a strange way. Among other eccentricities, he has for a considerable time suffered his beard to grow, and persists in refusing to be shaved. The name of Oliver does not appear among the witnesses. The trials will take place in the County Hall, which has been fitted up for the occasion.

So industrious have the Law Officers of the Crown been to conduct this extraordinary prosecution to an issue more flattering to their judgment, than that which belonged to the trial of Dr. Watson, that in addition to the most eminent advocates in the country, all the barristers of rank and talent on this circuit have been so retained for the Crown, with the exception only of Mr. Denman. The Crown have, indeed, no less than ten Counsel, namely, the Attorney and Solicitor General, Serjeants Vaughan and Copley, Messrs. Gurney, Clarke, Richardson, Reader, Reynolds, and Balguay. Serjeant Copley was, I understand, retained for the Crown immediately after the termination of Dr. Watson's trial. Against this formidable phalanx, Mr. Denman, and Mr. Cross, of Manchester, are assigned for the prisoners; Mr. Lockitt, Solicitor for the Crown; but there is a circumstance connected with this Gentleman which has given rise to a great deal of animdaversion here, and which will, no doubt, excite general astonishment. Mr. Lockitt was the active ostensible Under Sheriff for the county from the time that Captain Hallowes, the present Sheriff, was sworn in, until very lately, when a Mr. Simpson, of this town, was announced as the Under Sheriff. It is known that according to law an Under Sheriff cannot act as law agent for any party, and this provision is obviously meant to prevent the influence which belongs to such an officer, from interfering with the due administration of justice. Mr. Simpson is intimately connected with Mr. Lockitt. I give this statement, as it has been communicated to me upon good authority.

The list of the Petty Jury comprehends about 500 names, among whom, it is said, are several individuals respectable from rank and property.

None of the Judges have yet arrived. Four are expected, namely, the Chief Baron, Judges Dallas, Abbott and Holroyd.

Independent and intelligent men here speak of this extraordinary trial just in the same strain as the prosecution of Watson and Co. was spoken of in London. But Watson and Co. were highly intellectual and important, indeed, compared to the miserable beings who are here accused of compassing the death of the King and the overthrow of the Constitution.


---

TO DO
??Trial of Dr Watson??

---

NEED THE SATURDAY REPORT ETC

---
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18171020/007/0003
Morning Chronicle - Monday 20 October 1817

TO DO

STATE TRIALS. At DERBY, FRIDAY EVENING.

At half-past seven this morning, the prisoner BRANDRETH was brought from the gaol in the same manner as yesterday,- linked to the arm of Mr. Eaton, and in the prison caravan. -He was smoking a short pipe as he passed along, and seems to maintain a perfect equanimaity. There was not a single individual accompanying the caravan, save the Officers of Police. Among the inhabitants of the town, all is at present peace -and quietness, as we before seated; Isowever, perauns were not wanting to endeavour to produce a different feeling; ansiong otlser means taken to effect ans object, which it is unnecessary to explain, some persons have written in conspicuous parts of the town, and particularly on the wall of All Saints' Church, in large letters, the words- "Jurymen, remember Oliver!" The crowd pressing for admission to thse Court this morning was not less numerous than yesterday; and, on the doors being opened, every vacant space s0011 found an occupant. Lord and Lady Scarsdale were cii tise Bench with the Judges; and the more select prres of the Court were filled with persons of respectability, male and female. Mr. iHunt, of Dristol, was also ti present. At eight o'clock the Judges entered the Court, and in a few moments afterwards the Jury, who had been under the care of four officers during the night, at the King's Arms Tavern, where every accommodation had been provided for them, were ushered into Court, and called over. The prisoner was then lint to the Bar, and the examination of C else witnesses was resumed, to The witnesses examined to-dlay wer~e---ljah Hall, jun.; Isaac Walker, a farmer, of South Wingfield; Mrs. Ulepworteh; Sa--i ?? farmer Win Shiina, servant to the last witess Henry Hal; illam eots;Mr. Goodwin; Win.. Roper livig in he Stnd on the Rce-corsein Nottingham al Forest;Lauceot ?? ?? the County of Nottngham; nd apt Phllis, f te 1thDragoons. Here the case for else Crown was closed. ~~ai Mr. Canoss now proceeded to address the Court and Jury on the part of the prisoner in a speech of great ingenuity and fre. He stated, that he would be else last man who would stand up to justify the outrages committed on the night of the thof a] June; the point, however, which he conceived was to be decided in this case, was, whether the offence imputed to the prisoner amounted to high treason, or whether it was not an offence of a different character. The Learned Gentleman then proceeded to refer to the law of high treason, and to argue, that the evidence which had been adduced had fallen short of establishing else fact that that crime had been committed by the prisoner amid his associates. The Learned Gentleman also took fe occasion to) assort, that all the oisichitfs which lied accrued were attributable to the detestable publications of Cobbett, which were issued at a moment when misery and distress, the natural ]t` consequence of a protracted war, was prevaleilt in every part of h the country. Ilec had only to express his astonishment that the ir circulation of such poison had not been stopped by the Attorney General, He trusted, if the Jury had a doubt that the crinme of high treason had been fully established, else would give the prisoner the benefit of that doubt, and rescue their country from Id else imputation of being the only county in which telse crime of high treason had bee cothitedsine 145. On the part of the prisoner, one winess was then called, pi namey, ta Ovrseer of the Poor of the parish of WeLford, who rt provd tat h wa a framework-knitter by trade, and with lisa] Mr. Dxaras now addressed the Court and Jury on the h same side with Mr. Cross, and took til same hille of argument. 'rhe Comiet BAusON then asked the prisoner if he wished to address any observations to the Jury; to which the Prisoner said, he would leave his case to his Counsel. The SOLICITOR-GENERAL then addressed the Jury in reply, on the part of the Crown, in an able and argumentative speech, as which occupied the attention of the Court for two hours. VI 'rho Cnier BARON postponed summing up the evidence till bi to-morrow morning. The Court adjourned till eight o'clock to-morrow morning P' -at ?? siX. Ci 'rhe prisoner was re-conducted. to prison in tile usual way. 0 SATUaDAY, OCT. 18. CHARGE TO THE JURY.g The CHIEF BARON, soon after sight, addressed the Jury V to this effect -I must now request your attention while I state the evidence in this case, and suggest the observations that occur to me; and, In order to remove from your mind any apprehension that may have been excited of the Court interfering with i1t your province, I have to say, that it is as far from the intention of suny of us to encroach on, your province, as it can have been finns the intention of any of the Counsel -who have addressed you. You are to judge from the evidence applied to the case, according to the law of the case, as laid down by the best authorities. impartiality is your duty, and it is a Ostet' which I am confident you will exercise. If you thinslttrde evidence siffoirdsh proof of the cri ise charged, you will find the prisoner guilty; if, on the other hand, you find the evidence insufficient, you will acquit the priseoner and if, tlja should be the result, n10110 cais rejoice more than I, aasusred as I am that you will judge according to the evidence The first count in the indictment charges the prisoner with levying war against the King. It is very important for you so undetatand what is men ,.leyIng wer.te .4eeseslf5 ?? ou several meanings. I will now state, en you else law, as clearly established, in reference to the case before you. The words of the statute 25 dl- ' ward III. are, If a naan levy war against our Lord the King in his realm." The explanation of this law, which I ?? here (Fostger's), is short and clear: I therefore read it to you, rather than give an explanation inl silty words of my own: "1 If there he an insurrection, a large rising, of the people, in order by force and violence to accomplish ov revenge, not any private object or private quarrel of their own, but an object of a general nature, that is a levying of war against the King." From my experience of the administration of justice, from the decisions of Courts, and from the authority of Sir Matthew Hale, Judge Foster, and Lord CeI can affirm that this is a clear and correct explanation of the termns of the statutes. Private tumults are not a levying of war. If the object be only a private one, whatever may be its character otherwise, it is not a levying of war 'To destroy a private enclosure is not levying war againsthels King. To destroy all enclosures is a levying of war. Is the, object beto pull down a chapel, or an offensive building, it is not a levyig of war; if it lie to destroy all Chapels, or all offensive buildings, it is a levying of war. There must thats be an insurrection or large rising; force and violence must be used; it must be for a general object. That there was an insurrection is clear; and it also clear that force and violence were used. It is your:p~rov'slcel en say whether the object was general or private; I., bpr else insurrection was only the effect of private quarrels, ill ildl, violent, and riotous tumult; or whether the object was to alter telsenaasures of Government, and en destroy the laws of the country. If I Isave made myself intelligible to YOU, you can have no difficulty in understanding the nature of your duty. ?? other counts of the indictment are founded upon the 56th of else King. The question for you to determine is, whether any of the three charges is proved by else evidence wisichle nowv ie- tail to you. The evidence is all on one side, and nasta of the witnesses were not even cross-examined, yet attempts were meaeri very properly, in the speeches of else Counsel, to fix imputtilolli on the credit of the evidence. It is for you to judge whether such attempts were successful. The Learned Judge then read the evidence very fully. He remarked that the atrocious murder whicla took place was not treason, but it was for them to say what was the object of such atrocious Conduct. LIeI at last concluded a charge of two hours thus :-This, gentlemen, is the evidence. That there was an insurrection is clear; that there was a large rising, and that more were to join in Nottingham Forest is quite clear. It is equally clear that else persolisJ assembled thus were armed. There was then force and violence. Was this violent and forcible rising calculated to Fic- roinphish any private object, or to revenge any private quarrel; or was it calculated and intended to ailter else government and eon bring about a revolution? The low situation Ill life of the persons engge irsthi., insurrection is no excuse. A crime is not less a crime because the criminal is poor. If there could be no prospect of success, that is no excuse, because the crime consists in the intention and not in the adequacy of the means. The question for you is, was the rising calculated to alter the government, to overturn the laws, and to cauise a revolution? You have the evidence before you, and it says that it was declared from time to time that there couldabe no good without an overturn o h oenet ia else Parliament must he pulled down, and similar expressions. If you believe this evidence, 3'ou are sosnid by the cats you have taken to find the prisoner guilty. If, on the other hand, you calil lay your hands on your hearts, and believe, and are satisfied. that the object was private or personal, then you will not find him guilty. I am persuaded you will give every attention, and exercise the most perfect histegrity. All consequences that may reslt ou re o eave entirely out of view, and to regard only strct ustceans ajus vedic accordng to the law, inl the face 'I'e Jry etrei, ad u tsot miuts returned with a verdict, lndig ?? High Treason, atid cha hehadno tina r tnemnts godsor chattels, when the crime was cominitecil. The Court was excessively crowded, ?? the most profound silence prevailed while the verdict was given in aisd recorded. The prisoner seemed quite unmoved, and even indifferent. The CHIEF RAaCIN asksod the Attorney-General whether he could say it was probable that any other trial could be gone through to-day, as otherwise it would be a hardship for the Jury to he confined- during the Sunday. 'rho ??-GENERAL, conceived that it was oven ins~s tibiaeto fiisil any other trial this day, anudproposed, with si1r. Cross's consent, to adjourn till Monday. Mr. Cross assented. All the Jurors were ordered to continue in ?? josirled at half paste ten to ?? on Monday morning. When the Court adjourned, the prisoner was left in the custody of Mr. Eaton and afew javelin men. ThelI-Jail bad been cleared, but'two orthreepersbns foundtcheirwvay to the Bar, -where the prisoner was seated, handcitffed to 1.Mr. Eatdn. He appeared to have been washed this day, for the first time since the commencemeent of the proceedings, and, in consequence, the expression of :I . 1. 6 I his countenance was less ferociouskthan it had been till now Having seated himself on the bench behind the bar, he seemed to be for some moments absorbed in the contemplation of his awful destiny. A more than usual paleness invaded his cheek, a faint perspiration Iwxas observed to overspread it, and all the horrors of his stuation appeared to burst on his imagination. Reviving to a consciousness of the presence of the few individuals who surrounded him, he made an effort to resume his wonted composure, and answered one or two unimportant questions put to him with a smile, which might well be called, in the language of Milton, "a ghastly smile." He was treated with r great humanity and tenderness by those about him. As they, knew him to be much in the habit of smoaking, he was asked, "if he would like a pipe?" He replied in the affirmative; and a small part of a tobacco pipe, not more than three inches in length, was brought to him, which he had used before. One of the men who guarded him, observed to the person who brought it, "that he might have accommodated him with a clean one." Brandreth, however, made no objection to it; he received it with an awkward bow of gratitude, placed it in his mouth, and immediately began to smoke in the Court. Several female servants connected with the offices about the Hall were attracted by curiosity to gaze on the convict. His deplorable situation moved their pity, and they asked him "If he would like a tumbler of negus?" Brandreth seemed scarcely to hear, or to understand the question to be addressed to him. Those about him, however, replied, "Yes, bring it." They left the Hall to do so, and the caravan which was to carry the wretched culprit back to his prison being not yet ready for his reception, sufficient delay occurred to allo* them time to return. Brandreth having been supplied with a pipe smoked for some minutes, his eyes glistening with a half suppressed tear and fixed on that box fiom which he had just heard the awful word pronounced which doomed hins to an ignominious death. A Gentleman present inquired "' if the prisoner had any statement or declaration to make which he could wish to be laid before the public?" at the same time offering to be the medium of communicating any thing of the kind to the London Newspapers. He did not seem at first to compprehend the purport of the question, but on its being repeated, he desired the person from whom it came to apply to Mr. Bond the Attorney. Any statement that he might have to make he should make through that gentleman, but he added, "I do not intend to make any." The glass of negus was now brought. He bowed when it was given to him, said "Thank ye," and began to drink it. At the same time a large paper of sandwiches was handed to him, for which he seemed very grateful. He endeavoured to put them in his hat, but the liberality which supplied him could not be compressed within such narrow limits, and he was advised to carry them in his hand. Upon this, he wrapped them in old black handkerchief. The word "ready" was now given from without, to announce the caravan to be waiting for him. He hastily drank up what remained of his negus, and, carrying the sandwiches with him, was conveyed out of the Hall by the back way. He walked with a firm step, and with an air of gloomy resignation, escorted by a few javelin men to the caravan, which he ascended, being still handcuffed to Mr. Eaton, and was carried back to the prison at eleven o'clock, amidst a greater crowd than had accompanied him on any previous occasion. There was no cheering as he passed, nor was there any expression of an opposite nature; but the verdict of the Jury seemed to have made him an object of greater public interest than he had been at any time anterior to the trial, or, during its --rgF~i. fray /=r ma- ale react person that will be tried.

---
Editorial comment on the exchange in the Morning Chronicle - Wednesday 22 October 1817 https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000082/18171022/006/0002?browse=true#

It has been the constant and zealous practice of the Editor of this paper, from his first connection with the press, to support the cause of humanity wherever assailed. Justice requires that Jurors should not be prejudiced who are to sit on the trial of their fellow creatures; and therefore, when we saw attempts made to spread reports injurious to the miserable wretches about to be tried at Derby, in a paper that boasts of the countenance of Ministers, we felt it our duty to expose the cruel and unprecedented measure. That we were not the only persons who saw the insidious conduct of *The Courier* in the same light, may be proved by reference to every impartial Journal in Town.

This disingenuous practice was complained of by the Counsel for the Prisoner, who justly felt, that by the garbled reports of the former trial, the new Jurors might be influenced against the Prisoner then put to the Bar. That we may not be supposed to conceal any part of the proceeding on this complaint, we take the account of it from a Morning Paper, in preference to that of our own Reporter. But what will the public think of the manner in which *The Courier* of last night speaks of this complaint? "Previously to the commencement of the trial," says the Editor, "Mr. DENMAN, Counsel for the Prisoners, *instructed by "the Agents of Traitors*, no doubt, complained to the Court," &c. Instructed by the Agents of Traitors!- and "Mr. DENMAN followed his instructions!"-Such is the decent language of *The Courier*. Mr. DENMAN'S instructions could only come from the Solicitors appointed to defend the Prisoners. We make no comment on this insolent and outrageous insinuation, not against Mr. DENMAN only, but against the whole Bar. What! shall it be said that the British Bar take instructions from the Agents of Traitors, and *follow* them? After this, the gross and diabolical charge against this Paper-"that to please the Opposition in Parliament it would have Traitors escape—that no grounds may be made out for the suspension of the *Habeas Corpus*-to please the low detestable faction of assassins who call themselves Reformers-to please those *divers other Traitors* unknown-it would have Traitors escape that rebellion may prosper" - proves to what a depth of malignity this paper has recently fallen.


TO DO

??GET THE COURIER RESPONSE...



TH: the "verbatim" report in the Morning Chronicle - Wednesday 22 October 1817 https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18171022/009/0003 is slightly different to the above... eg Denham on Oliver

STATE TRIALS.

Derby, OCTOBER 20.

The legal advisers of the prisoners having determined still to persist in their plan of challenging the Jury on the part of their clients, separately, *William Turner* was the person selected by the Officers of the Crown to be tried next. This man was formerly in the Militia, but, having volunteered in the 20th Regiment of Foot, he has since bean abroad, and in Egypt and elsewhere fought the battles of his country. He is a tall man, 47 years of age.

He was brought from the gaol in the same manner as had been pursued with Brandreth, linked to the wrist of Mr. Eaton, jun. at about a quarter before eight. He is a man of plain appearance: he was dressed very decently, in a blue coat and coloured waistcoat.

The Court having assembled at eight o'clock, and the confusion resulting from the admission of the public having subsided, the prisoner was put to the bar.

The Lord Chief Baron then called on the Attorney-General and the Counsel for the Crown to proceed with their challenges.

PUBLICATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS.

Mr. Denman immediately rose, and addressed the Bench to the following effect -I feel myself bound in justice to the prisoners, as well as by a sense of the respect due to the Court, to bring under the notice of your Lordships a most gross violation of your orders, and a most scandalous contempt of your authority, calculated in a high degree to poison the due administration of justice, while it manifestly is a barefaced contempt of the authority of this Court, and calls for the severest visitation which any Court of Justice can exert in vindication of its own authority and in protection of judicial fairness. This paper which I hold in my band (*The Courier* of Friday) gives a Statement of the proceedings in this Court in direct violation of the distinct and repeated prohibitions of your Lordships. It is not a full statement, but a partial, and garbled representation, which not only prejudices the prisoner then on his trial, but all the prisoners; so that it has become impossible for the other prisoners to obtain an unprejudiced jury and witnesses to try their causes. This bare-faced attempt to elude the prohibitions, and to laugh at the authority of the Court, becomes the more injurious, as the first blow has been struck by a paper well known to be under the influence of Government.

Mr. Justice ABBOTT.-I know no paper under the influence of Government, or under any influence.

Mr.DENMAN—Well, perhaps I was wrong in using the expression; but *The Courier* newspaper published the garbled account, and the other papers copied it expressly "from The Courtier of last evening." *The Morning Chronicle* gives what *The Courier* omitted, by way of correcting the mis-statement; the one paper contending, that: Oliver was the source of the disturbances, the other publishing the evidence to repel that surmise, and thus the authority of the Court has been by both set at defiance, and the administration of justice poisoned.

The Chief Baron—The Court will then repeat its prohibition.

Mr. DENMAN—My Lord, that has already been done once, and again, and to no effect.

CHIEF BARON— Who has published that statement?

Mr. DENMAN—That I know not; all I know is, that here I read a gross and mischievous violation of the prohibition, and your Lordship distinctly stated, that the Court would visit any violation with punishment.

The ATTORNEY-GENERAL—Till within in these ten minutes I knew nothing of this publication. Yesterday I called repeatedly for *The Courier*, but I was told it was in hand, and did not see it. Within these ten minutes, somebody, I know not who, sent me *the Courier*. I have not seen *The Morning Chronicle*. I lament, as much as my Learned Friend, that the authority of this Court, and the interests of justice, have been thus violated; but I will say for myself, and for my Honourable and Learned Friend here (Solicitor-General), and for every one who has any office under Government, that it has been our anxious wish that, till the whole proceedings should be finished, not one phrase should be published on the subject. As to any newspaper being under the influence of Government, I can truly state, that I know not any one paper to be on one side or another, but according to the occasional statements I read in them. But whether the offender be on the side of Government or against it, when he is, upon proper affidavit, brought before your Lordships, I shall readily move for due punishment. There is here a professed account of what was stated by me. I can only say that I lament it most extremely, as a manifest violation of your Lordships' prohibition; and I lament and reprobate it as extremely improper to be stated, even if correctly stated, because it creates discussions and brings forward certain transactions, which must prejudice the administration of justice. I reprobate and lament it as much as y Learned Friend, but as the matter is now before the Court I cannot proceed further. I would request gentlemen who take notes not to forward them to the newspapers till the trials are finished, as it might become my duty to submit some motion respecting them, if supported by sufficient affidavits. I know not who has published this statement, but it may be said as an apology that it was done for a certain purpose, Which I may mention— namely, for the sale of the paper.

Mr. DENMAN.-I most fully acquit the Attorney-General, I need not say acquit, for I never supposed him capable, of coutenancing such an act as I complain of. However, I protest against the apology insinuated as utterly insufficient. It cannot be directly and gravely mentioned that the administration of justice should be poisoned With impunity, because the motive was the sale of a newspaper. I have only to say, that I hope the Court will adopt some measures to vindicate its own authority, and to keep pure the administration of justice.

The CHIEF BARON— I consider the publication in question very improper and very mischievous. It is most mischievous to all concerned. But all we know is, that it has appeared in a newspaper. We cannot tell who has done it, and therefore nothing can be done. When a motion is made in circumstances such as the Attorney-General has stated, then the Court will effectually interpose.

Mr. Justice DALLAS.— I recollect in the trial of James Watson, Mr. Wetherell, the Counsel, made a complaint of the same kind. I have the notes now before me; and my Lord Ellenborough said, "As you have no motion to make on the subject, the time of the Court must not be wasted by any further observations." With respect to any fact, we have here no fact before us. All we know is, that there is one statement published, by whom or under what circumstances we know not. As to the observation that the paper is under the influence, of Government, it ought not to have been made, because that cannot be known, and because it may excite a suspicion that the Government wished to obtain the conviction of the prisoners by unfair means. As no motion is made, the Court can do nothing further.

The other Judges said nothing, and thus the discussion terminated. 

THE KING V. WILLIAM TURNER.

Mr. Lownden now proceeded in the usual form to intimate to the prisoner at the bar his right to challenge the Jury as then came to the book to be sworn; after which he called over the names of the Jurymen in the order in which they had been summoned.

There were several challenges on the part of the crown. For the prisoner there were 55 peremptory challenges, namely:—

Wm. White, of Inderidgehay, farmer  
Robt. Beard, Dalbury, ditto.  
Wm. Salt, ditto, ditto.  
John Heacock, Erwall, Esq.  
Wm. Bailey, ditto, farmer.  
Thos. Archer, Hatton, ditto.  
Thos. Orme, ditto, ditto.  
Sam. Archer, Hallington, ditto.  
Thos. Hall, ditto, ditto.  
Walthal Sportier, ditto, ditto.  
Robert Wagstaff, ditto.  
Wm. Bakwell, Sudbury, ditto.  
Thomas Hollis, ditto, ditto.  
Luke Turner, ditto, ditto.  
Henry Hall, Sutton, ditto.  
Thos. Stratton, Tinsaley, ditto.  
Wm. Walker, ditto, ditto.  
Rich, Spencer, Ashleyhay, ditto.  
Thos. Cooper, Atlow, ditto.

John Mooreroft, Boylestone, maltster.  
J. Hurley, Edvoston, farmer.  
William Briggs, Alvaston and Boutlon, ditto.  
Richard Buxton, Clifton, ditto.  
Wm. Levern, Elvaston, ditto.  
Robert Briggs, ditto.
B. Pickerinsg, Markeaton, ditto.  
T. Lowudes, Marston Montgomery, farmer.  
John Bradsha, Osbiston and Thiervaston, ditto.  
Robert Shipton, Scropton. do.  
John Stretton, ditto, ditto.  
Robert Steeple, ditto.  
John Skevington, Yeaveley.  
W. Beresford, Snelston, gent.  
Solomon Frost, ditto, farmer.

The following Jury (of whom some were challenged for Brandreth) was at length sworn:—

Thos. Ensor, Marston on Dove, farmer  
Henry Spurrier, dito, ditto  
M. Goodall, Marston Montgomery, ditto, ditto.
Thos. Hall, Sutton, ditto.  
Sam. Dean, Aahleyhay, ditto.

T. Wagstaff, Arlow, farmer.  
Jos. Wheeldon, Alvaston, do.  
James Osborne, ditto, ditto.  
T. Crompton, Darley Abbey, gt.  
J. Glover, Findern, farmer.  
J. Haslam, Chester, ditto.  
T. Ordish, Mickleover, ditto.

The Gentlemen who had served on the last Jury, on being called, were asked by the Learned Judge whether they wished to be excused serving on the present. They all answered in the affirmative, and were excused accordingly.

The case having been opened by Mr. BALGUY,

The SOLCITOR-GENERAL addressed the Court and Jury.

The following witnesses were examined:— Anthony Martin, Shirley Asbury, Thomas Turner, Henry Tomlinson, Elijah Hall, sen. Elijah Hall, jun. Mary Hepworth, Samuel Fletcher, William Shipman, Henry Holt, William Booth, William Goodwin, William Roper, Captain Phillips, Joseph Wilkinson, John Storer, E. Rayner, and the High Sheriff.

The Court adjourned at half-past six o'clock till to-morrow.


?? The edition of the paper referred to is https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18171018/004/0003 Morning Chronicle - Saturday 18 October 1817; that paper cites its rationale for publishing the address as the publication of it in the previous nights edition of The Courier. https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001476/18171017/008/0002 London Courier and Evening Gazette - Friday 17 October 1817


Trial of Brandreth reprinted
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000082/18171027/002/0001?browse=true


---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18171108/010/0003
Morning Chronicle - Saturday 08 November 1817

THE STATE PRISONERS AT DERBY.

DERBY, THURSDAY, Nov. 6.

The criminals appeared in no respect materially different from what they had previously been. When the Chaplain visited Turner and Ludlam, he presented the latter with the book which we have already stated he wished to possess, in order to give it to his son-, Baxters Call to the Unconverted." Ludlam received the little volume with expressions of thankfulness, and said it was a book from which he had derived much benefit himself, and he hoped the son for whom he intended it, and others of his family, would profit no less by it than he had done. Two of his sons, who were among those recently liberated in consequence of the verdict of acquittal pronounced by the Jury, on the Attorney General declining to offer evidence against them, came in the course of the morning to take their leave. He welcomed them with affectionate tenderness, and earnestly entreated them to be good to their unfortunate mother and the children about to be left destitute by his death. Several other relations and friends afterwards called on him. While in the prison, they all assisted him with their prayers; and the energy of their appeals to their Creator and the Redeemer of man was such as to make them heard almost all over the building. When they were gone he repeated the sentiment he had expressed on a former day, upon a similar occasion, declaring the parting pang to have been less severe than he had anticipated it would prove, and he seemed consoled with the recollection of having been indulged with this new opportunity of seeing those who were most dear to him. The manner of his death seemed frequently to fill him with unspeakable horror. He was sincerely penitent, but he appeared deficient in fortitude.- By degrees his mind became more tranquillized, and he took a just view of the crime for which he was about to suffer. Attempting to raise his thoughts to Heaven in prayer that afternoon, while supplicating his Maker to pardon his numerous sins, he extended his appeal to the Throne of Mercy, by imploring the great Disposer of all Events, "?? to bless his native land:— to incline the King to love his people; to make him beloved by them, and to save the nation from a recurrence of those commotions which had disturbed the public peace, and brought him to an untimely end." He represented himself to have become very feeble since he had been in confinement; his health was certainly considerably impaired, and for some time he had appeared to be falling away. With respect to his family some erroneous reports have gone forth to the world. He has had fourteen children born to him, but of these only seven survive to mourn the ignominious exit of their father.

Turner, in the course of this day was visited by several of his friends and relations. Like Ludlam, he was much wasted by imprisonment and sorrow. Anxious to malte his present deplorable situation beneficial to others, he undertook to write a letter to some of his relations, which he hoped to make the vehicle of wholesome admonition to them. The effort was in vain. In vain he attempted to collect his thoughts, and to commit them to paper in such a form that they might be read with advantage by others. After repeated endeavours to complete his task, he confessed it to be too much for him, and wished his nephew to write in his place. He desired that an affectionate letter might be written, one that would be read with pleasure by those for whom he designed it when he should be no more; and to such letter he expressed a wish to affix his signature. A letter was accordingly written, but as no extraordinary interest can attach to such a performance, however moral and religious, not more immediately connected with those who are the subject of this article, we have thought it unnecessary to procure a copy. He did not explicitly confess his offence against his country as Ludlam had done, but he did not hesitate to admit that his conduct had been wrong.

Brandreth on this day exhibited a remarkable instance of fortitude. Few men in such circumstances have ever appeared so perfectly composed. There was nothing of levity, or of vivacity in his conduct, to call for reproof, but he was singularly tranquil, and he continued unshaken to the last. The Chaplain was astonished to find him thus serene. In his experience, he had never met with a man about to lay down his life for offences so aggravated, and under circumstances so peculiarly terrific, who could appear so little distressed, and whose mind was so completely made up to meet death without dismay. In conversing with the prisoner, he expressed surprise at finding him thus. Brandreth replied, that he felt himself sustained beyond expectation. He declared he had no fear, and did not at all shrink from the idea of mounting the scaffold. Upon this Mr. Pickering said, "he was apprehensive that that which made him so much at his ease, was a constitutional firmness of nerve, and not a fortitude springing from a study of the truth, and experience of the consolations of religion." The convict rejoined, that if he were capable of judging of his own case, he could not hesitate to say that the Reverend Gentleman was mistaken. All he had read of the Scriptures, and all he had heard in illustration of them, induced him to believe that he had a saving faith in him, and that the tranquillity of his deportment, which had been made the subject of remark, resulted from that faith, and not from any peculiarity of Constitution! The Chaplain then changing the subject of conversation, wished to obtain from him some particulars of his past life. All inquiries of this nature, however, he still endeavoured to elude. On their being pressed on him more closely, and the propriety of his satisfying them being enforced by the remark that it might be highly beneficial to others, to know by what means he had been led from the paths of honesty and peace, to engage in those courses for which he was about to suffer, he repeated it was his determination to say no more than he had already said on these topics. He refused even to tell who and what his parents had been. Any thing that might transpire respecting his former situation in life must be obtained from his wife; he would communicate nothing; and he hoped such questions would not be put to him again! The Minister next endeavoured to impress him with a due sense of the guilt he had incurred in shedding the blood of a fellow creature. On this subject at least, he suggested, a full confession ought to be made. Brandreth was here as impenetrable as ever. He had endeavoured to make his peace with God, and he did not see that it was necessary to make any statement for the satisfaction of man. To him it appeared this was a question wholly between the Almighty and his own soul, and now that he was about to be snatched from earth, he cherished a confident hope that an arm of vengeance would not be interposed between him and Heaven. He repeated the declaration that he had no reluctance to mount the scaffold, and felt no dread of the morrow! In the evening, when he was again visited by the Chaplain, his manner and his language were the same, and no trace of emotion or of fear could be discovered. During his confinement he once said, that but for Mr. Oliver he should never have been there.- He was pressed to explain these words, but refused to do so, and he never repeated the assertion, nor even mentioned the name of Mr. Oliver again.

DERBY, Nov. 7.

EXECUTION OF BRANDRETH, TURNER, AND LUDLAM.

At ten o'clock in the morning a detachment of dragoons had been marched to Nun's Green, the street in which the prison stands. The duty assigned to them was to keep the carriages from passing that way till after the execution. During the execution, they were specially charged to keep at a distance, as the civil power was considered fully equal to the important business of the day. The drop was enclosed by special constables, and in the rear of these the javelin men, on horseback, took their station. Several constables were placed in different situations near the prison, for the purpose of checking any disorder that might arise, but not the smallest apprehension of an attempt at a rescue was for a moment entertained.

Mr. Pickering visited the prisoners according to his custom, but came sooner than usual on this the last day of their mortal existence. Having visited Turner and Ludlam, and found them much in the same frame of mind as on the preceding evening. He then went to Brandreth. Here no change was to be observed. He had risen as usual, and smoked his pipe. His conduct was remarkably calm, but his calmness was rather that of insensibility than that of true fortitude. We know not whether any of his friends had supplied him with liquor, but certainly at times his manner of speaking much resembled that of a man in a state of intoxication.

The night of Thursday was passed by Ludlam and Turner in prayer and other devout exercises. They retired to bed but did not sleep. Early in the morning they sung a psalm, and endeavoured to improve the little time that remained t them. Brandreth went to rest as usual, but in the morning early he was also employed it the same way. He afterwards occupied himself in writing a letter to his wife. He had on the preceding day announced his intention to do this.

Several letters were written yesterday by, or rather for Turner. We have already mentioned that he had on the preceding day wished something of the kind to be done. The first was addressed to his brother and sister. He was heard to say he hoped they would be composed, and not grieve for their departed brother. He described himself to he quite resigned to his fate, and ready to meet the Almighty Judge of both quick and dead, before whom he hoped to stand acquitted of all sins done in the body. He praised the Lord for the change he felt in his mind, and exhorted those whom he addressed himself, to lose no time in seeking divine grace and salvation through Jesus Christ; and concluded, imploring for them the blessing of God Almighty. His name was signed to this letter, and at the bottom, by way of Postscript, the following words were added:—

"Dear Brother and Sister, when this comes to you I shall he no more. I desire well-"

Another addressed to his dear father, mother, brothers, sisters, and all his relations, was couched in similar terms, and written in the same hand. Like the former, it described the prisoner to have "felt a spring of happiness in his breast from prayer and repentance since his conviction, which he had never known before." To this was subjoined the following addition in his own hand:—

"Dear Father and Mother, when you receive this, I shall be no more. So a du Fair well, God Bless you all.  
"November the 7, 1817. WILLIAM TURNER"

No man could be more earnest in his devotions than the unfortunate Ludlam. He never commenced or finished a meal without raising his thoughts to God in prayer. While the Chaplain was yesterday morning with Brandreth, he prayed with Turner, and in so audible a voice, that many of his words could be heard in the passages of the prison. Some of the expressions he used were as follows:— "Oh Christ, look down in mercy upon us! Forgive us our sins, O blessed Lamb! Hear our supplications we beseech thee, and guide our souls through the valley of the shadow of death into the paradise of God. Grant this, O God, we implore thee, through the merits of thy Son, our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ." Turner responded to various passages in the prayers of Ludlam, who possessed a great flow of words, and both were evidently animated with the same feeling of penitence,— the same zealous devotion,— and, in some measure, consoled by the same hopes of salvation and everlasting glory.

After Mr. Picketing had left Brandreth, but a few minutes elapsed before Turner and Ludlam were brought from their room, to be conducted to the Chapel. Turner looked dreadfully agitated. Ludlam was more composed. On entering the yard George Weightman came up and shook hands with Turner. He did the same by Ludlans, who followed a few paces behind. Weightman was much affected, but did not speak further than to utter a short sympathizing ejaculation. Turner and Ludlam then ascended the steps leading to the Chapel. Brandreth appeared the next moment walking up the yard with his usual indifference. He followed the others into the Chapel, where, after the usual service, the sacrament was administered. All the other prisoners attended, but none of them partook of the sacrament but the three who were about to suffer. Ludlam had been particularly anxious to be admitted to this solemnity, and he seemed considerably refreshed by it when it had been administered to him. The others manifested proper feelings of self-humiliation.

While the three sufferers were in the Chapel, much distress appeared in the countenances and manner of their late companions in guilt, who were the spectators of the preparations for the execution. Edward Turner, brother to William, was so violently affected, that it was found necessary to remove him from the yard, lest his cries and groans should interfere with the devotions of those who were so soon to lay down their lives. Manchester Turner was in tears, and old Bacon, whom they sometimes named as the cause of their being in their then situation, seemed disposed to keep out of sight as much as possible.

The prisoners were expected to leave the Chapel at about a quarter before twelve. They, however, still remained there, when Mr. Simpson, the Under-Sheriff, arrived to demand their bodies, which he did in the following terms, addressing himself to Mr. Eaton, the jailor:

"In the name of the High-Sheriff for the county of Derby, as his Under-Sheriff, I command you to bring forth upon the Scaffold, the bodies of Jeremiah Brandreth, William Turner, and Isaac Ludlam, the elder, that their several sentences of death, for the High Treasons of which they have been convicted, may be executed forthwith."

To this the usual answer of form was given. Mr. Simpson passed into the prison, and an intimation was given to the Chaplain that he waited.

Mr. Bamford, the smith, attended to knock off the irons which the prisoner's had worn since conviction, and to put on those in which they were to die; the latter were precisely similar to the former, save that they had locks on them, by means of which they could easily be removed when the last struggle should be over. Formerly it was customary in this county to give the prisoners the choice of being executed in or out of irons, but of late years these executed have invariably suffered with their fetters on, as the wearing of them is supposed to accelerate the work of death, and to terminate their sufferings more speedily than would otherwise be the case. The only reason for knocking off one set of irons, and putting on another, is that which we have alluded. Those worn at the execution can easily be removed by means of a key; the others could not be knocked off when the men were dead.

When they had thus embraced, Brandreth addressed his fellow sufferer, while Ludlam was undergoing the first part of his sentence, that of being drawn on a hurdle.— "Well," he said, "we shall now soon be above the sky, where there will be joy and glory for ever and ever in the presence of Jesus Christ." "Yes," Turner replied with enthusiasm, "there will be no sorrow there, all will be joy and felicity." The Chaplain encouraged these hopes, and assisted them with other consoling reflections, till Ludlam was brought to the door of the passage. On entering from else yard he passed Brandreth and Turner, and did not take any part in the conversation just described, and which still continued. Brandreth declared he was quite ready to die, he did not feel any dread of it at all. Ludlam having passed them praying to himself, was met by Mr. Eaton, the gaoler's brother, who he thought had intended to stop him.— He, upon this, said—"I suppose I may take a turn or two here, up and down the passage;" and to this no objection was made; but he had passed but once up, when they were summoned to the scaffold.

When their irons were knocked off, and a second set put on, they sat down for a short time in the cell in which this operation had been performed. They repeatedly exclaimed, "Glory to God!" and invoked mercy from on high. This executioner and his man were here introduced to pinion them.

To the door of this place the sledge had previously been brought, it was turned the flat side upwards, and the horse was now attached to it. Brandreth came into the yard before the others, and immediately seated, or rather-tumbled, himself on it, at the same time calling out, "You must hold my hand, or I shall fall off." He was held on each hand, and immediately dragged round the yard. As he passed he nodded to the other prisoners in the yard, and said, "God be with you all, and with me too!" He passed from the hurdle into else passage of the, prison, where, in a few minutes, he was joined by Turner; who, on being asked how he felt himself, replied with some vivacity-" Why, I feel better than I could expect; I feel as if I should be happy." Brandreth took Turner by the hand, and they kissed each other.

They passed along the passage leading towards that part of the prison in which Ludlam and Turner had been latterly confined, and were now placed in a row at the foot of the ladder, by which they were to be conducted to the platform. Here they saw the bench and block, on which the last part of the sentence was to be performed, and had an imperfect view of the machine on which they were first to suffer.

After a momentary pause, Mr. Pickering passed up the ladder with Brandreth, preceded by else executioner and his assistant.

Once brought on the scaffold, dispatch is mercy to the criminal. That the sufferers might yesterday be dismissed from life with the greatest possible expedition, after they were exposed to the gaze of the multitude, it was ordered that the three nooses should be formed, and the ends of the ropes tied to the suspending beam, so that when the sufferers were led forth nothing might remain to be done but pass each rope over the head of the man for whom it was destined, to pull down the caps, and let the drop fall.

On mounting the scaffold, Brandreth exclaimed, "God be with you all and Lord Castlereagh." The cord by which he was to be suspended was tied too high; and on account of his shortness it became necessary to loosen it at the top to make it reach him. When his head was passed through it, and the knot placed behind the left ear, the rope being at the same time drawn moderately tight, the word was given for William Turner to be brought up; he ascended the ladder with a faultering step, and on reaching the platform, called out with an air of wildness, "This is all Oliver and the Government, the Lord have mercy on my soul."— The halter was then placed about his neck, and he then joined with the Minister in prayer. The third sufferer, Isaac Ludlam, was now brought up the ladder, he prayed, as he passed up, and while the rope was being placed about his neck, raised his voice in humble supplication to Heaven, in the following terms:-" O Lord, forgive my sins, and receive my soul, and grant that I may meet all this great concourse of people in Heaven. Bless the King of this nation, bless the people bless all the people high and low, rich mind poor, bound and free; yea, bless all, from the King upon his throne, down to the meanest subject in the realm, and may this awful dispensation be made a blessing to thousands and tens of thousands. O Lord, receive my spirit!" The Chaplain asked if he would listen to the prayer which he was proceeding to read to Brandreth, and Turner, but Ludlam seemed not to hear him, and continued to repeat his former prayer. After a few moments, perceiving the Chaplain was reading, he stopped, and joined the others in their responses. When the Minister had ceased to read, the three culprits joined with him in repeating the Lord's Prayer; after which the Reverend Gentleman took his leave. The executioners put the caps on the heads of the unhappy men, and pulled them over their faces. Each of them exclaimed at this moment "Into thy hands, O God, I commit my spirit." They continued to call on their Creator and Redeemer for mercy; and I. Ludlam was once more giving utterance to that part of the prayer above inserted, when, at 25 minutes before one, the bolt was drawn, and they were launched into eternity. Brandreth was scarcely convulsed for a moment; Turner moved but little; Ludlam struggled for several minutes after his two fellow sufferers were motionless.

Notwithstanding the resolution come to, to cut down the bodies so soon as life should be extinct, they were permitted to hang for more than half an hour. It was note quite half past twelve when they came on the scaffold— they were launched into eternity at twenty-five minutes before one, and it was some minutes after one before any thing more was done. Two sacks of saw-dust had been placed at the back part of the drop. The platform was now raised, and the saw-dust strewed over it. Before the drop was again put up, strings had been tied to the legs of the dead men, and by these they were lashed up to the bar which runs round the platform. The bench and block were then brought up, as were the two axes, two sharp knives, and a basket to receive the heads. Three coffins, on which were chalked the names of Brandreth, Turner, and Ludlam were next lifted out.

The body of Brandreth was then cut down and laid on the bench. The cap was removed from the head, and the neck having been pressed close on the block, at 25 minutes after one the executioner struck the blow. The head was not at once detached from the body, and the blow appeared feebler to the populace than it really was, and a groan of disapprobation and horror was the consequence. The assistant, however, with one of the knives, instantly completed what had not been accomplished by the axe. The head fell in the basket, and the hangman seizing it by the hair, held up the ghastly countenance of the Nottingham Captain to the view of the multitude. He proceeded with it to the left, to the right, and to the front of the scaffold, bearing the trunkless ball in his hand, and exclaiming, at each place, "Behold the head of the traitor Jeremiah Brandreth." The head was then carefully deposited in the coffin, which immediately afterwards received the body. The body was then placed on it, and the heads of Turner and Ludlam were taken off and exhibited in precisely the same manner. This part of the execution did not occupy more than ten minutes; the whole finished in an hour. When the first head was held up, some of the women in the crowd ran away in alarm and dismay from the dismal spectacle. Some hisses and groans were heard, and these unusual sounds added to the terrors of those who had previously begun to retreat. The panic agreed like lightning, and a confused idea that the dragoons were about to charge the populace, in consequence of the hisses that had escaped them, caused the immense crowd assembled in front of the prison to retire in all directions in the utmost consternation. The alarm was of course groundless, and we have not heard of any accident.

The bodies were yesterday to be interred at dusk in St. Werburgh's Church-yard. From the scaffold they would be removed till evening to a place at the back of the prison, called the Vagrant House.

An execution for High Treason, at least for that description of High Treason, which comprehends at levying of war against the King, is rare, thank God, in every part of the British empire, but Derbyshire, till the present occasion, no such event had been known. The annals of the county present no instance of the kind. Derbyshire has, indeed, produced traitors, whose lives have been forfeited to offended justice. Such were found in the memorable year 1745, but the parties being taken and tried elsewhere, the place to which they had originally belonged was spared the exhibition of a scene like that which it is now our melancholy duty to describe, and which, partly from the circumstance above referred to, but more from the peculiar features of the case, has excited in that part of the county, at least, a sensation indescribably strong, and (like that which has caused it) wholly without precedent.

The apparatus used on all ordinary occasions, though called the new drop, is in truth on the principle of the old drop, which, at Newgate, first supplanted the practice of executing criminals from a cart. It is not brought out on wheels, like the machine seen so frequently in front of the Debtor's door in the Old Bailey, but takes all to pieces, and is kept in a building at the back of the prison. To put it together is generally the work of many hours. In order effectually to guard against the actual business of the day being protracted considerably beyond the usual time of execution, it became necessary that the men employed to erect the gallows, should commence their labours before day-light. At a very early hour yesterday morning, they accordingly entered upon their task, and having removed the parts of the drop from the place where they deposited, to the fatal spot on which the culprits are destined to expiate their treasons, they proceeded to arrange and unite the several parts under the superintendence of Mr. Finney, the Town Joiner, double the usual number of hands were employed. During the whole of the morning numerous spectators were attracted to witness the progress of the workmen in the business they had taken upon themselves to perform. Between nine and ten o'clock their labours approached their termination, and the whole of the apparatus appeared in so complete a state of readiness that the sentences pronounced against the culprits might have been carried into effect almost at a moment's notice.

The last men who suffered in this town were four persons convicted of firing the corn-ricks and stacks on Colonel Halton's premises, near South Wingfield. At the time that the prisoners were brought out to die, the weather happened so be very unfavourable, and the rain fell in torrents while they were ascending the platform, and during the time that was consumed in tying them up and in adjusting the fatal knot, so as to ensure its despatching the criminal with the least possible delay. In, Derby, as in most country places, it has not been customary for the sufferers wholly to finish their devotions within the prison walls, and they have been permitted to remain on the scaffold for a much longer time than is usually granted to persons in their dreadful situation in London. On the occasion referred to, when the wretched men felt the raise fast descending, they, with a strange anxiety to avoid a slight inconvenience, of which, at such a moment, it could hardly have been expected they would be at all conscious, endeavoured to shelter themselves under the umbrella of the Minister who was praying with them, and under the projecting roof of the prison; While thus waiting, as it were, for the shower to subside, one or more of them were engaged in conversation with some of the crowd who were near them, and the decorum and solemnity of the scene was broken in upon in a manner not at all to be desired. They had previously declared, that if they were put to death for the offence proved against them, but which they denied to the last, that they would cause Col. Halton's name to be called in question from one end of the country to the other. They endeavoured to make good their words. The usual ceremonies being concluded, the Chaplain was about to retire, when they requested to be indulged with permission to sing an additional psalm. This request was complied with, and the psalms ended, instead of resigning themselves with decency to their fate, they advanced to the front of the scaffold, and addressed the crowd in very strong language, declaring they were about to be murdered, and that they had only been brought there by a prosecutor and witnesses who had perjured themselves. Isaac Ludlam had been much in the habit of visiting and of praying with Brown, one of the men who acted the part above described. It is not known that the course he decided upon taking, was either suggested or sanctioned by Ludlam, but to guard against a repetition of such conduct was thought proper, especially on an occasion like the present, when addresses to the populace like those which we have been describing, might excite a more dangerous sensation than could be produced at any ordinary execution. With these impressions on their minds, those on whom the duty of carrying the sentences into effect devolved, were naturally anxious for arrangements that would prevent the recurrence of such conduct. No way appeared so well calculated to effect this as to intimate to the sufferers that their religious exercises musts take up little time when they came on the scaffold. It was, therefore, resolved to adopt this course, and to instruct the executioner to draw the caps over the eyes of the sufferers, immediately after the noose should be adjusted which care was taken to provide should be done with the least possible loss of time, after they made their appearance on the drop.
  
In consequence of he determination thus come to, Mr. Pickering, when he visited them on Thursday morning, intimated to en Brandreth, Turner, and Ludlam, that if they had a desire to sing any particular psalm or hymn, the proper time for doing so would be when they were in the Chapel, or, at all events, before they went out. They were further informed, that any confession, declaration, or statement, which they might wish to leave behind them, they would have an opportunity of making within the walls; but they must not expect to be permitted to address the populace from the scaffold. No one of them seemed to have formed any intention of making a speech, and the new arrangements called forth no particular observation.

It will occur to our readers that this is the first execution that has taken place since the law against High Treason was altered, so that the offenders should be sentenced to be "hanged by the neck till dead" instead of being "hanged by neck, but *not* till dead." The case of Col. Despard, therefore, who suffered under the ancient sentence of the law was not exactly the same as that of Brandreth and his accomplices. Despard, and those who suffered with him, were suspended for 25 minutes. Some doubt at first existed, whether in this case, as the parties were sentenced to hang till dead, a longer time ought not to be allowed than was considered to satisfy the law under other circumstances, though life was certainly quite extinct, when those to whose execution we have referred were taken down from the gallows. It was not proposed, however, to let them hang more than half an hour, but upon further consideration, as it was thought it would be well that the whole of the painful ceremony should finish within the hour, it was judged better that the attendance of a medical man should be procured to report when they were dead, and on this being announced, Mr. Simpson, the Under Sheriff, decided that the remainder of the sentence should be forthwith executed upon them.

Some apprehensions were entertained that the executioner, unaccustomed to the use of the axe, would not perform the last part of his duty with appropriate dexterity. On the day previous to the execution, he went to the smith for the purpose of examining the axes. He tried one of them on the trunk of a tree, but did not handle it so well as could be wished. He was advised to be careful before he struck the blow to see the neck well bent to the block, and at the same time cautioned against hitting too near the shoulder, where he would encounter a hard bone, which might make a repetition of the stroke necessary. He promised to attend to these instructions, but as working in the collieries he had been in the habit of using the axe and pick-axe, he was confident he should not fail. A fear still remained, that when the moment came he would feel intimidated.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000082/18171110/005/0002?browse=true
Morning Chronicle - Monday 10 November 1817

In this, and we believe, every other Christian Country, peculiar importance has with. reason been generally attached to the last words of men conscious of approaching dissolution. It is on this principle that the Law of England views with such peculiar sanctity any declaration which a man who falls by the hand of another, and who knows that he is dying, may make with respect to the circumstances that led to his death. It requires no slight evidence to persuade us, that on such an awful occasion any motives can be sufficiently powerful to induce a human being to plunge into eternity with the language of falsehood in his mouth. If this presumption of veracity is entertained, even in cases where the irritation produced by recent violence has hardly had time to subside, how much more ought it to be entertained in cases where the mind has been sometime settled in a calm contemplation of eternity? The approach of death is calculated to extort the truth even from the most irreligious. Supposing a man to die in the certain belief, that with this world his existence closes, and that he has no retribution to dread beyond the grave, a certainty of belief which, if the truth could be known, has, we suspect, been shared by very few indeed, at the awful hour which closes for ever all his mortal prospects, few motives can be supposed strong enough to induce him to practice delusion on his fellow creatures. But when the heart is. thoroughly imbued with the truths of religion—when a man, dies in the firm conviction that he is to appear in the presence of an Omniscient Judge— when his soul is wrapped up in the contemplation of its future being, what earthly motives can be supposed sufficiently powerful to induce him to draw down on himself the certainty of divine vengeance, and to depart with conscious falsehood on his lips.

That the unfortunate men who suffered the sentence of the law at Derby, on Friday last, were sincerely religious, has, we believe, been generally admitted, and, indeed, from all the accounts of their conduct subsequent to their sentence, must be evident to every unprejudiced mind. In all that they did, in every thing which fell from them, in all that they wrote to those, whom they held most dear, an intense feeling of religion was not to be mistaken. On Thursday TURNER and LUDLAM, it is said, "prayed together with a an earnestness and a fervour that were quite overpowering."—On Friday morning the same men "looked shockingly wan and spiritless. They had watched the whole night in prayer and psalm-singing. At nine the Chaplain visited. them, and assisted them in their devotions. They afterwards continued aloud till the moment of immediate preparation arrived."-BRANDRETH, though less agitated and less fervent in his devotion to outward appearance, seems to have been also sincerely religious.

The last words of men so strongly under the influence of religion, are intitled to peculiar regard; and we have not a doubt that their dying declarations with respect to their instigators, have produced the strongest impression throughout the whole country. With all the care and anxiety which has been displayed in so extraordinary a manner since the final condemnation, still it has transpired, that BRANDRETH latterly was heard occasionally to mutter, "OLIVER: has brought me to this." "But for OLIVER I should not have been here." But what was of more consequence still, TURNER, *while the executioner was putting the rope'round his neck*, exclaimed loudly and distinctly, "This is all OLIVER and the Government." It is said, "*the Chaplain at this moment came in front of these two* (BRANDRETH and TURNER) *and prevented any further observations*." This Chaplain, who is reported to have manifested great zeal on this subject before the day of the execution, seems to have been no less on the alert on that awful occasion.

Knowing the effect which these dying declarations could not fail to produce on all dispassionate minds, the emissaries of Government have been endeavouring to weaken it, by attempts which, we are persuaded, must be viewed with universal disgust, if not execration. In the report of these emissaries, published in *The Courier* of Saturday last, an endeavour is made to call in question the sincerity of the religion of the prisoner whose last words, on the scaffold, pointed to OLIVER as the cause of his fall. TURNER and LUDLAM, it is said, "are both Dissenters; but we all along questioned the sincerity of TURNER'S prayers, *although he seemed to join devoutly with Ludlam, and addressed Heaven in the loudest and most impassioned strains*."- Questioned the sincerity of his prayers! Why were their sincerity questioned? An imputation of this kind ought to be made on no slight proof. Do we not every day see the most wicked and hardened criminals, wretches without instructors, and rendered callous by a life of continued transgression, still clinging with ardour to religion when bereft of all worldly hope? Why then are we to suppose that these men, educated in a knowledge of the truths of religion, for which they ever showed a reverence, and whose conduct, with one exception, has we believe been hitherto unexceptionable, should now in the hour of need withdraw themselves from all its consolations? Why should we suppose the hypocrisy of these poor men so monstrous as to induce them to pass their days and nights in prayers and supplications, of which their hearts knew the insincerity? We can easily conceive that the dying declarations of these men, after all the precautions taken to prevent them, must have occasioned no small degree of alarm in certain quarters; but we could hardly have conceived that this alarm should have so far blinded those by whom it was felt, as to induce them to have recourse to the means to which we have alluded. The condition of mind to which the fervent devotion of the Derby prisoners could suggest doubts and suspicions, is hardly to be envied, however useful it may be to its possessor. Such a degree of scepticism argues a state of internal feeling, which reflection at least might have suggested the propriety of hiding from the world.

We will not stop to notice several other particulars, which have been derived from the same source, and which have been published with the same view. We have a better opinion of the public than to suppose that any observation of ours is necessary to guide their judgement with respect to artifices so obvious, and yet so revolting. We have only to add, that the account of the proceedings at the execution was not from our own Correspondent, and that it reached us at a late hour on the morning after the Paper had gone to Press.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18171209/006/0002
Morning Chronicle - Tuesday 09 December 1817

OLIVER AND THE DERBY CONSPIRATORS. (OLIVER AND THE DERBY CONSPIRATORS.

(From the Leicester Chronicle of Saturday, Dec. 6.)

*The Editor of the Leicester Journal* in his paper of yesterday, has appropriated to himself an article under the above head, copied from some Ministerial paper, which we are enabled, *from authority*, to contradict in every sentence. Indeed we have seldom witnessed, *even in the Journal*, such a tissue of falsehoods in the short space of a single column!

First,— The Editor has stated that not one of the to Prisoners ever criminated Oliver, and with the exception of Bacon, not one of them ever saw him: Whereas in fact, all the Prisoners criminated him, and several of them saw him.

Secondly,— That Mr. Denman alluded to Old Tom Bacon, and not to Oliver, when he repeatedly called on the Attorney-General to bring forward the *prime mover of the Conspiracy*: Whereas Mr. Denman did not leave this matter in the dark; but actually named Mr. Oliver as the person, who was to be brought forward, and *did not* allude to Bacon— who could not be brought forward, because he was a prisoner.

Thirdly,— That Oliver was brought down to Derby, and remained there during the whole of the trials, and notice of his presence was immediately given to the Counsel and his agents: Whereas Oliver was not at Derby during any part of the trials, *nor was any notice ever given to the Counsel*, or his agents, of his being there.— Brandreth did admit, that he was fairly tried; but in every instance, even before the Chaplain of the Gaol, DECLARED THAT HE FELL A VICTIM TO THE ARTIFICES OF OLIVER !!!

Fourthly.— That nearly a thousand pounds were collected by small subscriptions for the defence of the State Prisoners, in Leeds, and other "Seats of Sedition," and that the Money was misapplied, and no just at account rendered of their expenditure— that Mr. Cross was paid 100 Guineas, with difficulty, and Mr. Denman nothing: Whereas there was not one farthing collected from Leeds, or from any other "Seat of Sedition"— that Mr. Cross was paid with promptness, and Mr. Denman was offered his fee, but declined accepting it, and that the Solicitors of the Prisoners are *One Hundred Pounds out of Pocket, and have had no remuneration whatever for THEIR professional labours and expenditure*.

Fifthly and lastly.— The Journalist states, that the professional Gentleman of Halifax told the "Oliverian Editor from Leeds," that the insurgents at Huddersfield had nothing to do with Mr. Oliver: Whereas that professional Gentleman (whose name is Alexander) did not state it in that way: Mr. Alexander stated that his Clients had both knowledge and concern with Oliver; but that the Counsel on both sides abstained from introducing his name or that of his Confederate Mr. *Bradley*, into the investigation of that charge, *as it was totally irrelevant to the offence, maliciously shooting, for which they were indicted°— and no way connected with High Treason !—So much for JOURNAL "*veracity!*"
