
October 1817 - Pentrich trial


Oliver mentioned in https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001476/18171020/010/0004
London Courier and Evening Gazette - Monday 20 October 1817
THE TRIALS FOR TREASON

On Saturday, the *Morning Chronicle* asserted that our Letters from Derby were designed, not merely to "prejudge" the case of the prisoners, "but to inflame the public mind against them." This is a charge which may be made against the publication of any account of the crimes with which they are accused. At this rate, nothing should ever appear respecting any accused person, until his trial is concluded. Yet all the papers are daily filled with Police Reports in the face of this rule. Why publish examinations before Magistrates; why publish bills of indictment before trial? It is particularly complained, that on Thursday, our Derby Letter began thus, "the town is all bustle and confusion, arising from the commencement of the Quarter Sessions, and the arrival of the period appointed for the trial of those unfortunate men, who by a series of the most wanton and outrageous acts, on the 9th of June last, threw this and the adjoining county into a state the utmost terror and alarm." It is also complained, that we said places of religious worship had been chosen for the assemblage of the seditious, though that fact was affirmed to the sermon preached before the Judges previous to the Court's opening. And what crime is there in saying, the men going on trial are those who committed the excesses on the 9th of June? Does not the bill of indictment say they [*sic*] same? Have not all the Newspaper details, reports and rumours said the same? Has not the same been said a hundred times over by every Newspaper in England? The very fact of sending the men to trial authorises the assertion. Is there a man in England who, on such a fact, or on such an assertion, would doom the men to death? No, certainly. That can only be done by a Jury, after a minute and impartial investigation of the evidence on both sides.— The Magistracy decide, in the first instance, such charges to be sufficient to send such men to trial. After this, how can newspapers speak of them but as the men so accused?

While we are censured for speaking of these men in similar terms to those which all other newspapers have used respecting them, let see how the complaining *Morning Chronicle* has been basely endeavouring to defeat the justice of its country, by assertions of their innocence, by insinuations that they were instigated by Oliver, &c. in publications timed to have an effect at the moment of trial.

*From the Morning Chronicle of Tuesday, October the 14th—Extract of a letter in the most conspicuous part of the Paper, signed Fitzwilliam:—*

THE EARL OF LIVERPOOL.
October 10, 1817.

My Lord— To those who have carefully perused the indictment of the forty-eight men who are to be tried for High Treason on the 15th of this month, at Derby, it must be matter of some surprise that Ministers, after the issues of their late political adventures in the Courts of Justice, should once more endeavour, on similar grounds, to make out a case of high treason against the whole people of Great Britain, as a justification of having deprived them of the benefit of the Constitution and the protection of the law.

That the aforesaid forty-eight men may have committed an atrocious riot, that acts of violence and robbery may have been among the consequences, and that even murder may have been committed, is all very possible—although I see not a word in the indictment respecting a foul murder said, on very good authority, to have been committed; while it repeatedly set forth, that the rioters came forth "with intent to attack, fight with, kill and destroy the soldiers, troops and forces of our Lord the King;" in order "to subvert and destroy the Government and Constitution."

Now, my Lord, recollecting that "our Lord the King" has an army of one hundred and forty-nine thousand veterans, commanded by officers of the highest gallantry and greatest skill, we naturally inquire, who are these forty-eight men, what their connections, and what the means in possession or prospect whereby they were to carry into execution the enterprise stated in the Indictment? and that document describes them as follows, namely, one tailor—one blacksmith—one farmer—one stonegetter—two stone-masons—and forty-one labourers !—It is true that we are there told five hundred and upwards joined in the tumult. But does not our common sense revolt at seeing such a tumultuary proceeding a scheme for subverting the Government?

Why, my Lord, are not these men tried for their real and visible crimes, if, as reported, of much atrocity? Is not the law in our too-well-known criminal code sufficiently strong to punish them? But why, through the sides of these forty-eight rioters, is an attempt to be made to justify the punishment which, on mere green bag imputations, has actually been and continues to be inflicted on the whole people of Great Britain by the functionaries who administer the Government?

Suppose, my Lord, that by inference piled on inference, interpretation tacked to interpretation, construction coupled with construction, a plain Derbyshire Jury should b so puzzled and confounded by the metaphysical distinctions and law fictions the ten or twelve learned Barristers who it is said are retained by the Crown against the prisoners, as to be unable to distinguish what is from what is not a treason, explained as to be incomprehensible, and should such Jury be thereby moved and induced by the instigation of so many gentlemen of the long robe to find a verdict of guilty, your Lordship will recollect that another verdict will remain to be given before the nation will be satisfied——namely, the verdict of dispassionate reason at the bar of the public.

As person convicted of high treason is not only to suffer an ignominious, but a cruel death; so a proof of that uncommon crime ought not to depend on slippery inferences and suppositions, but to be so plain and palpable that no man of sense could doubt it. A proof by construction hanging on construction, savours too much of the ludicrous reasonings of the adepts of derivation.

In the way of ridicule, your Lordship may have heard "Pickled cucumber" thus derived from Jeremiah King."—"Jeremiah King"——"Jerry King" —"Jerkin"—Girking"—"Pickled Cucumber." Let us hope that nothing so ridiculous will be played off at Derby, for deriving high treason from a licentious tumult of a misguided, stupid rabble!

Touching that part of the indictment, my Lord, which accounts for the depravity of mind—the seat of intention, which constitutes crime,—it is said that the tailor and his companions were "moved and seduced by the instigation of the Devil" to do as they did. This I take to be a fact; because I have been credibly informed, that a Devil in human shape was particularly active in the work of seduction and instigation.

*From the Morning Chronicle of Wednesday, last.*  
Derby.—Tuesday Morning.  
The Law Officers are understood to have determined on making a selection of those against whom the evidence is most conclusive.

To this legal novelty, however, it is probable that *considerable opposition* will be given by the Counsel for the accused, as they are stated to be of opinion the *acts of the individuals* thus distinguished, will be likely to receive a *colouring*, which would not attach to them, viewed in connection with all the proceedings of those with whom they have been concerned. Many of the prisoners are very young, and in the *lowest* situations of life. The whole of them, or nearly the whole of them, are spoken of as being *extremely illiterate*. Brandreth, the person accused of the murder, has latterly deported himself in a strange way. Among other eccentricities, he has for considerable time suffered his beard to grow, and persists in *refusing to be shaved*. *The name of Oliver does not appear among the witnesses.*

So industrious have the Officers of the Crown been to conduct this *extraordinary* prosecution to an issue *more flattering to their judgment*, than that which belonged to the trial of Dr. Watson, that in addition to the most eminent advocates in the country, all the barristers of rank and talent on this circuit have been retained for the Crown, with the exception only of Mr. Denman. Mr. Lockitt it Solicitor for the Crown: but there is a circumstance connected with this Gentleman which has given rise to a great deal animadversion here, and which will, no doubt, excite general astonishment. Mr. Lockitt was the active ostensible Under Sheriff for the county, from the time that Capt. Hallowes, the present Sheriff, was sworn in, until very lately, when a Mr. Simpson, of this town, was announced as the Under Sheriff. It is known that, according to law, an Under Sheriff cannot act as law agent for any party, and this provision is obviously meant to prevent the influence which belongs to such an officer, from interfering with the due administration of justice. Mr. Simpson is intimately connected with Mr. Lockitt. I give this statement, as it has been communicated to me upon good authority.

*Independent* and *intelligent* men here speak of this *extraordinary* trial just in the *same strain* as the prosecution of *Watson and Co.* was spoken of in London. But Watson and Co. were highly intellectual and important, indeed, compared to the *miserable beings* who are here accused of compassing the death of the King and the overthrow of the Constitution.

*From the Morning Chronicle of Thursday last.*  
Derby, Oct. 15.  
I have reason to believe, the more correct opinion is, that the first trial will comprehend six of the prisoners, who are said to have been implicated in the commission of murder. That murder was perpetrated the day on which the indictment alleges the insurrection to have taken place, no doubt is entertained: yet that crime has not been recited among the overt acts set forth in the indictment; but it is apprehended that the evidence by which it will be established may have material influence upon the fate of the accused. Why, however, we may ask, should the proof of murder produce a conviction for high treason?

The first trial will, it is expected, occupy five or six days, and it is said that the publication of any of the proceedings will be interdicted until the whole of the trials shall have terminated, if indeed more than one trial take place. For if acquittal should be the result of the first trial, it is concluded that, as in Watson's case, the prosecution will cease, while, if conviction should take place, it is rumoured that the Crown will not seek for any more victims,

Among intelligent observers, the whole of the disturbance which gave rise to these prosecutions is attributed to the artifice and activity of the noted Oliver. He is understood to have been acquainted with several of the prisoners, but especially with one of the name Bacon, who is quite an enthusiast, somewhat resembling the character of Preston. Several anecdotes of a curious nature are told of Oliver in this district. He called upon a Mr. Robertshaw, (the keeper of a respectable tavern in Derby), last Whitsunday, to whom he introduced himself with great confidence and familiarity as an ardent reformer, connected with some of the most popular advocates for reform in London. He inquired about the number of the population of Derby, and dwelt upon the force which it was capable of employing to make the voice of the people heard and attended to. Nothing, he said, but force, could make the people be heard by such Ministers as governed the country; and that it was shameful in the people to be silent, and especially inconsistent on the part of the Members of the Hampden Club to lie dormant on such an occasion, when their friends in London were so anxious for their assistance and co-operation.

*From the Morning Chronicle of Friday last.*  
Derby—Wednesday Night.  
It is not yet understood what course the Attorney-General proposes to pursue, whether to try only one prisoner or several in the first instance. If the former, it is supposed that Thomas Bacon will be the man, as he is the first named the indictment; and also, as in a printed paper circulated here, it is said from the Crown Solicitor's Office, the proceedings are denominated "An indictment against Thomas bacon and others for high treason." This Bacon is the person with whom, as I mentioned yesterday, Oliver had frequent communications. Bacon was Chairman of what was called Hampden Club Ripley, in this county.

...

[TH: unrelated but of amusementt.]

A SUBJECT EXTRAORDINARY FOR DISSECTION

A Subject Extraordinary for Dissection.—

A singular circumstance occurred at Mr. Brooks's, Surgeon, in Blenheim-street, Oxford-street, at seven o'clock last night. At that hour a coach drew up to the door, where subjects for dissection are received, and a body a sack was deposited on the top of the stairs leading to the dissection room. The coachman and assistants made their bow as usual upon such occasions, and left the subject. Mr. Brooks happened to be present, and asked one of his men why he did not tumble the body down stairs? The man in compliance with his master's mandate began to perform his work, taking hold of the end of the sack, and having got it down two steps, a living subject threw his naked arms and shoulders out, and begged for his life, not relishing being tumbled down about twenty stone steps. A scene of confusion followed, easier conceived than described. Mr. Brooks stood over the subject with a brace of loaded pistols, whilst his attendants flew for an officer. Prompt assistance, was had, and the fellow, in a complete state of nudity, was imploring mercy with the engines of destruction at his head, when that assistance arrived. The account he gave of himself was, that he had come from Teddington that day, that he had got so drunk he did not know how he came there. He said he had no recollection of the person or persons who brought him there, or where he had been. Mr. Brooks observed, that men run for wagers in sacks, and at his suggestion the sack was tied round his chin, and a hole being cut through the bottom for his feet, he was conveyed away by Needham, constable, to the watch-house in a coach.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001476/18171021/003/0002

London Courier and Evening Gazette - Tuesday 21 October 1817

[TH Courier response ]

William Turner, accused of High Treason, and one of the persons included in the indictment of forty-eight for rebellion in Derbyshire, was yesterday put upon his trial at Derby, before another Jury, and the trial was expected to be concluded this day.

Previously to the commencement of the trial, Mr. Denman, Counsel for the Prisoners, instructed by the agents of traitors, no doubt, complained to the Court that the *Courier* had violated its prohibition, by publishing garbled accounts of the proceedings. Mr. Denman followed his instructions, which informed him, partially and falsely, if the report in the *Times* of this day, which we think it more fair to quote than our own, be correct. He says "the other Papers copied the garbled account of the Attorney General's speech expressly from the *Courier* of last evening, the *Morning Chronicle* adding what the *Courier* omitted." The *Courier* expressly said, that the statement it gave of the Insurrection, was not an account of the Attorney-General's speech, garbled or ungarbled, but a statement to inform the public generally of the nature the offence under trial. Mr. Denman could not have read the Courier, or he would not have made such misrepresentation; he must have spoken merely from the instructions of the agents of traitors. This statement which we gave, the *Morning Chronicle* next day chose, for it's own purposes, to consider as a garbled account the Attorney-General's speech, and under that pretence published a report of that speech. Circumstances, however, shew how well it knew it was acting under pretences and falsehood, how fearful it was of its own conscious guilt and the punishment of the Court. It raised a clamour against what it called the demi-official Journal of Government, a description of which are proud, whether just or not; as violating the injunctions of the Court, and while it blamed, it followed what it censured as our evil course. That was not enough. It did not feel easy in acting on a pretence evidently so shallow. It must have further protection. Therefore, it prevailed on another Morning Paper, which generally supports the Government, to commit the same offence it did, under precisely the same word of apology. They published the same *verbatim*, these two Papers which scold each other on politics nearly as much as any other two do. "Now," said the *Chronicle*, "I can not only set up a pretended precedent from the *Courier*, but I share my guilt with another Government Journal; I am shielded on both sides." This was not all. We were also accused of giving garbled accounts of the evidence, though we merely published a list of witnesses as they were examined, carefully omitting any application to the prisoners of any thing they said, and in fact giving nothing of what they did say. If, then, we published a garbled account of the Attorney General's speech, and a garbled account of the evidence; why did not the *Chronicle* publish a correct account of the evidence, to correct our garbled report in the one case as well as the other? It was by far the necessary duty of the two. But they dared not go quite so far. That would have been to have violated the injunctions of the Court, not only in letter and in form, but in spirit, in the most essential point. In fact, it was the report of the Attorney General's speech in the *Chronicle*, that was yesterday the real ground of complaint, though the agents of traitors' contrived to make it appear as the report of the *Courier*, else how could the Attorney-General, in alluding to the report complained of, say; "There is here a professed account of what was stated by me."—No such "professed" account appeared in the *Courier*. It was the *Chronicle* that the "professed" account appeared. Had the Counsel and the Judges read the *Chronicle* and the *Courier* during the three last days of last week, they would have understood the subject precisely as we state it. But the complaint was made at the instance of the agents of traitors, the opposite side was not warned or prepared to answer it, and the agents of traitors were thus enabled to make the affair go before the world just with such sort of colouring as they chose to give it. And after all:— the publication of the Attorney-General's speech was not a mischievous infraction of the orders of the Court, though a very distinct breach of them. One of the journalists, who was the first to clamour against us; when we answered by referring to the publication of the Bill of Indictment, replied, that was an official document, its phraseology merely technical, all its details and assertions of guilt, all its inflammatory language passed for nothing with the public, it being notoriously a highly coloured *ex-parte* statement. And, pray, what is the speech of the Attorney-General, or of the opening Counsel in any case, but highly charged, partial representation, which passes for nothing until it is proved to be true by the evidence, and the charge from the Judge? The *Chronicle* should thank us for helping it out of the scrape into which it has fallen.

Indeed, this act of service we the more readily perform, as we know the clamour the *Chronicle* raises is not in a spirit of hostility to the *Courier*, but with the hope of calumniating the Government, by representing that the *Courier* acts wholly under the direction of Ministers. Yesterday we stated, and we again affirm, that no one communication, written or verbal, has been received from any person connected with Government, on the subject of the matter that has appeared in this Paper respecting these trials. We ourselves have gone to great expence, to procure the earliest accounts of them, and we have just as much reason to lament the prohibition of the Court some of the other Journalists, who whine and whimper, and pout, every morning, over their fruitless speculation, of establishing expresses the road for "the REGENT" and for "Lord Sidmouth." Every one and every thing hostile to the Government is espoused by the *Chronicle* as a matter of course. Black spirits and white, blue spirits and grey; mingle, mingle, mingle; all you that mingle may.— To please the Opposition in Parliament, it would have traitors escape that no grounds may be made for the suspension of the Habeas Corpus; to please the low detestable faction of assassins who call themselves reformers, to please those "divers other traitors unknown", it would have traitors escape that rebellion may prosper; and hence, in no spirit of ill will to the *Courier*, but purely to calumniate Government and encourage treason, it attacks Ministers as the Editors and Conductors of this Paper. The charge is very agreeable to us, very flattering. Not so, we fear, to the Ministers, who, if the *Chronicle* speaks truly every day, of the horrible embarrassment into which they have involved all our public affairs, have quite enough to with the business of their own Offices, without writing paragraphs for the *Courier*.

The above observations have been written upon the report in the *Times* this morning of the proceedings yesterday at Derby, previously to the perusal of the account in the *Courier* this day, as we wished to avoid being influenced by the representations of our own reporter. A perusal of our own report, since writing the above, however, strongly confirms us in the review we taken. Had we previously known of the proceedings in Court yesterday, we would not this day have copied from the *Times* an account of the Attorney General's opening speech on *Brandreth*'s trial; but that part of our Paper was printed before our Express from Derby arrived.

---




https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001476/18171021/003/0001
London Courier and Evening Gazette - Tuesday 21 October 1817

THE INCENDIARIES.

The following observations are Copied from *The Day* Newspaper of yesterday:—

"*Brandreth* himself embarked in the scheme with a savage resolution and ferocity; and in carrying it into effect he shot a man with his own hand. This fact however, though it adds blood-guiltiness to treason, in no wise alters the character of the latter crime: just the attack on Mr. Platt's life, or the burglary and robbery in which young Watson was engaged at the time of that attack, made him neither more nor less guilty of the treason, in the prosecution of which those crimes were perpetrated. Of Brandreth's guilt no doubt can exist: but in common justice to this poor deluded man, we must offer something which, if it not an extenuation, is least an explanation of his offence. There is no doubt but that his ignorant mind was heated, and his weak judgment perverted by reading the seditious libels of Cobbett, and the blood-thirsty speeches of Hunt. In our conscience, therefore, we must say, that his criminality was far lighter than that of either of those monsters. Their wickedness was deliberate, and therefore on their heads rests the blood of Cashman, of poor Jeremiah Brandreth, and all the other criminals whose lives may be eventually sacrificed to the vengeance of the offended laws. The prisoners at Derby appear to be ignorant, uninformed men; but Cobbett and Hunt have not that excuse. They have both unfortunately acquired sufficient talents and abilities to lead their fellow-subjects into the commission of the highest political crimes. Cobbett, by his pamphlets, and Hunt, his speeches, urged the populace to madness; but both of them possessed art enough to draw their own necks out of the halter. Cobbett has run away to America. Hunt, it seems, has had the unfeeling audacity to present himself at Derby, to witness the fate of the poor men, who had acted in the spirit of his atrocious harangue at Spafields. We know not whether this was a part of the infamous system of intimidation lately adopted by the seditious faction to corrupt the administration of justice.— Perhaps Hunt thought that his presence would have the effect of preventing Jurymen from doing their duty to God and their Country. If he did he was mistaken. Other measures, however, were certainly resorted to by those who wished turn aside the course of justice. The walls of Derby were inscribed with appeals to the Jurymen, and the Theatre was disturbed by the lower orders endeavouring to prevent the performance of the loyal air of* God save the King*. Happily, the Derbyshire Jurymen appear to have had their judgments less perverted by the sophistry of Sedition, than some other persons in their own rank, in other parts of the kingdom. We have used the term sophistry, but we might perhaps go somewhat farther. It is true that certain London Papers, of a certain rank and standing in that class of publications, no more than extenuate, and tacitly encourage treason; but those of a lower class go much further. A composition of Cobbett's was on Saturday published more sanguinary, more murderous, more directly levelled at the lives individuals, than any thing have ever seen even from the pen of that diabolical writer. This cowardly wretch indulges his malignity, because he thinks himself personally safe from prosecution; but why his Publisher is suffered thus to cast about 'firebrands, arrows, and death', we cannot conceive.

[TH what was that Cobbett publication? ]


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001476/18171021/008/0003
London Courier and Evening Gazette - Tuesday 21 October 1817

TO DO? Long report whole page ish

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001476/18171021/012/0004
London Courier and Evening Gazette - Tuesday 21 October 1817

TO DO

 SPECIAL COMMISSION DERBY. second day, Thursday, October 16. In compliance with the injunction* the Court, hare carefully abstained from being the /fraf publish any of the proceedings on the trials for treason at Derby, that could disclose the case of the prisoners, or affect the interests either of the prosecuted or the prosecutor. This course shall pursue till the proper time for publication arrives. The following U copied from *The Times* newspaper of yesterday. Jeremiah Brandrerh, otherwise John Coke, otherwise The Nottingham Captain, being put to the bar, Mr. Attorney-General, rote, and commenced observing, that the gentlemen whom he had the honour to address were now assembled to perform one the most solemn and important duties which could devolve u|H>n them as members of civil society : it was, they must already be aware, to decide upon the guilt or innocence of an individual charged with the highest crime which could be committed against society, and against that order of things which, thank God, had been long happily established in this country. There were other offences of great enormity to which human nature was sometimes instigated, in violation of the law, and of the rights of individuals; but there was none that originated in deeper malignity, or was so directly dangerous and subversive of society, the crime described in the of the law as high treason ; the safety, comfort, and happiness of them all, depended on the security of that government and constitution which had been established in this country for so many years, and which hoped might, if possible, last (or ever; his own duty consisted, in the present stage of these proceedings, stating, accurately as he was able, and under the correction of the learned Judges, if he should happen to misstate or misconceive it, the as affected the prisoner, and applied to the acts charged in the indictment. God forbid that he, or any man in hi* situation, should attempt to farther, even if there did not exist that security for every subject which was be found in the learning and wisdom those who presided upon all such investigations; he hoped it would be recollected the Jury, that they were to derive the true construction of the law from that source, and not from the arguments counsel either side. Perfect stranger as was that part of the country, and necessarily unacquainted with the Gentlemen the Jury, he had perfect confidence that, upon solemn occasion, they would exercise their functions impartially, unbiassed by any motive but the impression made upon their under-Mndings the evidence, and with recollection that they at. tested their Maker to the integrity of their conduct.— There were three distinct charges of treason against the prisoner: the first of which stated, that he had, in conjunction with others, levied war against his Majesty, and describing certain overt acts, viz. arm* •ing themselves for this purpose, and using other means with view to its success, and was founded upon the statute of the 25th Edward III. For many years his was the only, and still remained the most important, statute on this subject: and the other charges were founded upon statutes which contained no material difference, but described certain substantive and specific •ers, amounting to the crime of high treason. The 2d count referred to this description, which was to be found the 66th of the Kirg, and was that of compassing and imagining to depose the King. The overt act in which the treason consisted was that of consulting with others, and of providing arms sod ammunition for the purpose of subvening, hy insurrection and hostile force, the Constitution of this realm as by law established. It charged also, that in pursuance of this design, the prisoner and others dkJ openly parade with arms id a warlike manner, and did actually levy war against his Majesty. The charge was, that he had conspii'ed to levy war against the King, in order to compel him to change his measures and contained the same overt acts stated the former part of the indictment. The legal meaning of the word to compass,” as used in the statute of Edward, was considerably different from the ordinary sense and acceptation the term: it meant, in familiar language, to effect” object; but the law of treason, its construction was imagine or intend.” It was sufficient, therefore, to affect the prisoner with this offence, if he could be shown to have joined with others in hostile array, in execution of design to subvert the established Government, even though he had no other absolute determined object, or knowledge of any ultimate purposes entertained by others. A Learned Judge, Mr. Justice Foster, as much attached the liberties of bis fellow-subjects as any Magistrate that ever adorned the bench, had distinctly stated, that every insurrection for public and general purpose, such the pulling down all enclosures, the opening all prisons, or the reforming imaginary or real grievance of public nature of arms, was construction of law high treisot against the Crown. It was a mistake to suppose that-war against the King could only be levied a foreign force, but the only war that could be levied by subject was that of insurrection and rebellion. was of no importance upon this point, whether there had existed any probable chan:c spreading war throughout the kingdom, and renewing the calamities of fo/mer periods in "its history ; the treason was complete, however few might create the insurrection, and however weak chances of success. It might likewise a necessary observation for him to make before he proceeded to detail th e circumstances the case, that the crime of treason existing the mind, could be proved do better evidence that the declarations of the prisoner himself, when found to be conformity and consistency with all the circumstances, anj with the overt acts charged in the indictment. The crime itself was simply an inference from all the circumstances produced in evidence, and did not consist in any particular act. should endeavour show that the prisoner, with others, had projected a plan for overturning the laws and government this country ; and was perfectly indifferent to inquire what they designed to establish in its place, whether a National Convention, or a mere state of anarchy.- whether they had no definite object Of any kind. only question for their consideration was, did the prisoner,' contemplate the subversion of the government, and take any measures for effecting this object. If they did entertain such a design, and attempt to carry it into execution by insurrection and hostile force, then they had unquestionably, according to the laws of England, commuted palpable high treason. It would appear, he apprehended, in the course of the evidence, that the prisoner had joined with others in arranging a plan for the achievement of some public purpose means hostile force and violence ; that although not present at all the meetings of the conspirators, was active in endeavouring advance their plans ; that he was commonly designated by the title of the Nottingham Captain,' and had been appointed to lead, conduct, and command division of the rebel army, which was formed. 

thow, that is pursuance of,* and in connection with, this design, was agreed to assemble in insurrection on night of the 9th of June, in a piaffe called Nottingham Forest; and that the prisoner went Pentridge, in the county of Derby, on the Sunday preceding, to see the expected insurgents, who were to subvert the Government, and, use their own language, to wipe all off” It would likewise appear, that the prisoner, on this occasion, exhibited to others maps and plans the intended progress of the insurrection at public-house known by the name of the White Horse, endevouring by these means to procure a simultaneous rising in different places, and stirring up evil spirits deeds of conspiracy and rebellion.— The insurgents not only armed themselves, but provided supply of arms for those who were expected to join them. They collected pikes, gunt, pistols, and every species of weapon that fell in their way. From lluut'i bar they proceeded to Uolison'clone. Brandrerh, the prisoner, and George Weightman, who were the lers, were preceded a considerable body of .heir p.n ty ; their object w.i* add a* many their numbers as possible by compelling others join them, and provide arms for those who might willingly enter their ranks, or whom they might compel into their service. They were fully aware of the influence of numbers among who were ignorant of the nature of the force, or the means em ployed to increase it, they therefore always declared their purpose collect men and arms. It had been said that the arms Englishmen W'-re allowed them for their defence, and lor the protection of those houses which for security are prim lly called .their castles. Among our ancestors this was prmmced, and reckoned proud boast. Little was it thought by those who allowed It that they were, in the instruments of personal and domestic protection, providing weapons to put into the hands such men Brandreth and his associates, to overturn social order and destroy their fellow subjects. 13ut the seizure of arms was not enough. They a.'.tied to this violence, that of compelling their owners to join them. The inhabitants the houses to which they paid their unwelcome visit* were required give their guns, and either join their party themselves, or, if there was no male bead of family, to semi son, or a servant, to swell their numbers. They openly declared their intention have man or a gun from every house to which they wi lit; but the man whom they pressed was not allowed retain the instrument which they seized. It was put into the bands of a willing attendant,and another weapon be forced upon the owner. After conducting themselves in this manner, they proceeded from Dobson's close the house of Mr Thomson. They had not hitherto been joined such numbers of their adherents they expected. They therefore determined to dispatch some of their followers Pentridge, to gain intelligence of the state of preparation of their partisans in that quarter, to hasten their march, and learn the cause of their lardy approach. This party was headed George Weightman. The others under the command the prisoner came to the house Elijah Hall: they there took gun, and insisted the son of the owner joining them. Elijah Hall was compelled to go along with them, but deserted them as soon he could, and fled back to his own house. It was fortunate circumstance for the justice of the country, and the cause of order, that this man was forced into their ranks, and compelled so long attend their movements this means the jury would have to listen the testimony of honest a m could found, speaking to facta thu came within his own knowledge and under In* own eye, ami fully disclosing the intentions and conduct of the prisoner. This person, who would be brought forward as a witness, accompanied, thou, h reluctantly, the party the Insurgents to the house Mr. Walker. When they arrived there, they usual demanded gun The owner of it was reluctant to surrender it, but was compelled yield. When they got the gun, they still were di«->'t •V I, and returned demand the pistol which they heart! to be In the hcusec owner denied that had one, but they searched ami took it from his belt. From thence they proceeded to the house Samuel Hunt, who joined them, and was one of the prisoners whose name was in the indictment. Thence they went to the house of a person called Epworth, where an unfortunate evant happened, which would appear in evidence, but which had not brought as i against the prisoner on his pTes.nttrial. wished particularly to put the Jury on their guard against any influence which this circumstance might have upon their minds in making out the charge of treason. lie desired them not to adjndgv the prisoner guilty his trial for high treason,because he, the course of the evidence fur establishing the charge, might obliged to-bring testimony which might appear sufficient to prove him guilty of murder. Crimes, in the judicial procedure this country could not mixed so to give the one any influence in supporting the other. ITie commission murder, though proved, therefore could not be alledged as evidence of high treason. At this house they, usual, demanded arms, which the inhabitant, with more courage than they generally had to encounter, refused ; the resistance was fatal: as the insurgents could not force the door, Brandreth went round, and breaking a window, introduced himself into the room where the owner was. The learned Counsel then mentioned the murder that was committed, with the saying of Brandreth, the prisoner, that he had shot one man already, ami would one that opposed him. From the house of ?? they proceeded that of Mr. Fletcher, and thence to Butterly Iron-works : before they arrived at that place, there appeared great uncertainty in their movements, great doubts to their proceedings, and despondency to their success; they were not joined by the numbers they expected. their way to Nottingham, place called Greenwich, the two parties which he had formerly mentioned formed a junction but being still wavering in their resolution from the want of previous success, they sent out scouts, of whom one was George Weightman, to learn if the others whom they expected were advancing from Nottingham : he took a horie out the stable of a person at that place and proceeded towards Nottingham on this mission ; the mean time the main body remained under the command of the prisoner at the bar, who was called their captain. The party were this time completely organized; they bad not only leader in chief, but inferior officers to execute his commands, and to keep the insurgents in the ranks; these latter were tv bring up the rear, to collect stragglers, and compel those who wished to leave them back into the ranks; the intended fugitives were told that they nimt proceed, and that desert would endanger their lives ; the command was threatening and peremptory. this manner the party advanced to Lan fc ley-bridge. George Weightman, who bad been sent to bring tidings of their expected adherents, her* joined them; and whatever representation gave flic prisoner, Brandreth endeavoured to encourage them, and said all was going on well; that the soldiers were starved and discontented, and that Nottingham was already taken. Many here relented and deserted, notwithstanding every effort employed to keep them together. They then proceeded to Eastwood though reduced in numbers. These proceedings took from Sunday till Tuesday morning, in the meantime, notice had been given the Magistrates the neighbourhood of Nottingham of Che advance of such a body insurgents, lie had forgotten to say that several persons in Nottingham Forest had been prepared join them, and that certain movements their* excited suspicion. One of the Magistrates rode out and found the party In most miserable plight, dispersed or dispersing ; saw the remains of their recent progress, and of their ter- Miied retreat; he saw arms all kinds, guns, pikes, pistols, and other instruments left on the field, like the wrecks of a dispersed army. That the prisoner was there, that was the leader and encourager the insurrection, that he was what was called the Nottingham Captain, that he organized the party, that he formed the order of march, that showed the plant and mars by which be was guided in them on, there could be no doubt.— Some at the witnesses might not be able identify his person because, allowing his beard to grow, and appearing now' did in Court, he had somewhat changed himself from what he was, and took every of concealing his identity, lids however, could not avail, as sufficient evidence would be brought, that was the same person who was at the bead of the party, and directed their motions. He submitted, if be could establish the facts which hid mentioned, he should sufficiently make out substantive act of treason in levying war. There was here a hostile force; arms were collected: band for a general purpose was organized; the body marched on in warlike array; they compelled all whom they met to join them; and they openly professed the design of overturning the established institutiml of the country. There could not be a more shocking mode of levying war. was every respect treason the eye law to assemble in arms, profess the intention force accomplish any general purpose contrary the established authorities of the country. The Attorney-General thus concluded What answer learned Friend enriv" sure I know not; hut unless he can alter Hew, unless can prove the prisoner different person, it appears tome impossible, according to the law and evidence of the case r—i which ta .« laid before am priori has ail of defence which Intelligent and iranartud •“ ‘be-meen. which Learned and candid Court can give ; unsure has all the means which the talents, ingenuity, and learning of a Counsel can suonlv has, then, all the means which Englishmen can have for their defence at the bar of their country. The Attorney-General sat down at Two o'Clock. 


---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001476/18171022/003/0002
London Courier and Evening Gazette - Wednesday 22 October 1817
p2

It will seen by the account of the proceedings at Derby, that another of the individuals (*Wm. Turner*) charged with High Treason, has been found Guilty.— To excite pity for a convicted traitor, some of the journals still insinuate that the Jury were influenced by accounts in this Paper of the proceedings on the trial, as if they, who had witnessed the whole, whom every passing was addressed, should not know more than what are called "garbled extracts" could inform them! The trial began on Thursday; nothing respecting the proceedings on it could appear in this Paper till Friday, and on Saturday, three or four hours before the Friday's Papers could arrive, the Jury had given their verdict. The London mail reaches Derby at two o'clock, and the Jury had pronounced their decision before twelve.

The *Morning Chronicle* boasts of having ever supported the cause of humanity. Humanity! Is it humanity to advocate the cause assassins and traitors, endeavouring spread fire and desolation over the land? Two days before *Brandreth*'s' trial, it argued his case over in a letter, signed and pronounced him innocent: it contended he was a dupe of Oliver's artifices, he, this *Brandreth*, who appears to be one the most atrocious ruffians of the assassinating gang of Reformers. This was the *Chronicle*'s "humanity." It would have let loose upon us a sanguinary ruffian, a murderer. To-day it says— "Justice requires that Jurors should not be prejudiced who are to sit on the trial of their fellow-creatures;" and it obeys its own maxim by shewing to the Jury going try a man, that the man is innocent!—that he was only the dupe of OLIVER, though Oliver's name was never mentioned on the trial." All this canting and clamour, and misrepresentation, is designed, no doubt, to answer the same purpose as Fitzwilliam's Letter, to prejudge the innocence of the men yet to be tried.
