# Leicester Chronicle

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000172/18180110/020/0004
Leicester Chronicle - Saturday 10 January 1818

Benjamin Scholes, the publican at Wakefield, whose evidence before the Magistrates at that place, was instrumental in exposing the artifices of *Oliver* and causing a number of poor mea who had been apprehended near Leeds to be set at liberty, passed through this town the beginning of the week, on his return home, after having been confined upwards of six months in Cambridge Castle, by order of Lord Sidmouth. We understand that the whole of the State Prisoners, committed since the suspension the Habeas Corpus Act, have been liberated from confinement upon their own recognizances, with the exception of the Messrs. Evans (father and son), and Benbow, who insist on being brought to trial, or discharged *unconditionally*. Mr. Knight, of Manchester, arrived in that place, on Friday last, from Reading Gaol.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000172/18180117/026/0004
Leicester Chronicle - Saturday 17 January 1818

Our exertions to trace the connexion between the Agents of the worthless Ministry that is suffered to rule with arbitrary sway over the nation, and the circumstances that took place in Derbyshire in June last, we have reason to believe, have had a considerable effect in leading the public mind to a correct opinion respecting the real causes of what have been termed the "legal murders" which have stained the annals of the country during the past year. The evidence of Bradley himself, who, it will be recollected, was the co-adjutor with *Oliver* in the Spy System; with the corroborative facts lately published in our paper, form a body of evidence to which no reasonable man can refuse his assent, and completely establish the conclusion so discreditable to the Government, that not a vestage of Treason would have existed in the country, but for the agency of their own Spies. In addition to these the evidence of Benjamin Scholes, who was a few days ago liberated from the dungeon in which he was confined six months for no other *crime* but that of discovering Oliver's plot against the People, confirms the fact of the connexion.— This person, who then kept a public house at Wakefield, which Oliver frequented, is ready to state upon oath, if required, that Bacon met Oliver at his house several times previous to the Pentridge riot.\* The real truth then appears to be, that Treason was wanted in a certain quarter to cover designs far more treasonable against the liberties of Britain; and if it could not already be found amongst a People almost urged to despair by the dreadful effects of the misconduct of their rulers, it must be brought into existence by a set of wretches hired for the purpose.+ To this do we owe the bloody spectacle exhibited the very day after the nation had been bereaved of an illustrious Princess in which, notwithstanding the sneers of the Editor of the Journal, "and though the sacrifice was performed with all imaginable solemnity, the farce was predominant over the tragedy, and a nation blushed at the execution of what was already called national justice!"

We again call upon the Editor to disprove our statements if he can. Let him be assured the public will not rest satisfied with impudent cavils, or wilful slanders, respecting a pretended difference between the Prisoners' Counsel and Attorneys, or a misapplication of money said be collected, while evidence to rebut the main fact of the plot originating with Oliver cannot be produced. But to shew the Public what credit is to be attached to the confident assertions of the Journalist even on minor points, we give below a specimen of the numerous falsehoods he has foisted upon his readers, and thus consign him and his coadjutors the *Observer*, and *Leeds Intelligencer*, to that merited indignity, which their attempts to delude the public justly deserve!
 
\* Some of our readers may probably enquire what became of the Leicestershire treason, which made so considerable a figure in the first Green Bag. We assure them that some of the honourable fraternity endeavoured to patch up a plot in this neighbourhood. A respectable Tradesman in Leicester received an anonymous letter, telling him to prepare his gunpowder and shot, as it would be wanted in a few days! This letter was very properly given up to the Magistrates, and the receiver thus escaped the snare which was laid for him. Can any person inform us, if the hand writing was compared with that of *Oliver*, or whether any means were made use of to find out the author?

+ It may be remarked here, what high ideas of *morality* one of our county Members must have, who took upon himself to eulogize Oliver the Spy as a *moral* man &c.— We hope and trust that at the next election the Freeholders of Leicestershire will inform that gentleman that they are determined not to become the disciples of the Professor of a new moral Philosophy Mr Stoughton Grange College. 

STATE TRIALS AT DERBY.

To the EDITOR of the LEICESTER CHRONICLE

Sir,  
It appears that the Editor of the Leicester Journal was not the Author of the string of falsehoods which have appeared in his paper relative to the State trials at Derby, but that he copied them from the *Leeds Intelligencer* and then adopted them as his own. If he had merely stated them as a copy extracted from that paper, and upon finding the same erroneous, he had exercised his judgment dispassionately, by correcting his mistakes, it would not only have evinced his candour, but would have exonerated him in some measure from blame;— instead of which he has repeated in his subsequent papers, *without any knowledge upon the subject*, that Mr. Cross the leading Counsel for the State Prisoners, refused to go into Court upon the second day of the trial, without being first paid his fee of 100 guineas, and that "nearly a thousand pounds were collected by mall subscriptions for the defence of the conspirators, in Leeds and other seats of sedition, and that the money was misapplied and no just account rendered of the expenditure." In regard to Mr. Cross, it is due to him to state, that his engagements at Derby were ascertained, and clearly defined by all parties, before he left Manchester, not only in respect to the amount of his fee, but the extent of his time: his fee was settled to be 100 guineas, and to be set at liberty after the trial of the first prisoner at Derby, in order that he might attend to his professional duties at the Sessions at Manchester. The first Trial commenced on Thursday and ended about Twelve o'clock on Saturday, and with that Trial ended Mr. Cross's engagement; his fee was paid by Mr. Wragg, who alone managed all the Receipts and Payments, checque upon his Banker.

Instead of Mr. Cross shewing any reluctance to go into Court either on the first, second, or any other day, he stated to myself and Mr. Wragg, at the end of the first Trial, that he could not, consistent with the etiquette of the bar, after being assigned as Counsel for all the Prisoners, leave the remaining Prisoners in a defenceless situation, and that he therefore should continue to advocate their defence so long as a Prisoner remained, without any renumeration whatever; and he accordingly voluntarily remained at Derby eight subsequent days as the leading Counsel for the Prisoners, not only at his own expense but with out any Additional fee, and that no misunderstanding existed between him, Mr. Wragg, and myself, upon any subject  whatever.

Mr. Cross's statement in the following Letter, fully corroborates these factsi

Rosthrene Hall, Jan. 3d, 1818.
 
Dear Sir,— I have received your Letter requeeting me to contradict one the many disgusting misrepresentations that have arisen out of the late trials at Derby.

I can truly attest that I never did refuse or object, to go into Court there, in consequence of any dissatisfaction with you, and that no misunderstanding occurred between us on any subject whatever.

I am, dear Sir,  
Your most obedient Servant,  
John Crow.  
*To Robt.. Bond, Esq. Solicitor, Leicester.*

With regard to the last art of the charge, I beg leave to state, that no money whatever was collected by smallsubscriptions at Leeds or other "Seats of Sedition" for the defence of the Derby Conspirators, but, that all the money collected was cheifly from Mr. Moore of Ripley, Mr. Whiteman of Pentridge, and from Mrs. Hunt of Smith House. The account of Payments and Receipts stands as under:—

Totel Receipts £137  
Total Payments £241

Mr. Wragg and myself took several Journies to Leicester, Manchester, Nottingham, Leeds, Halifax, Dewsbury and London, and devoted two months of our time to the defence of the State Prisoners, for which we have received no professional remuneration, and are now the above £100 out of pocket. The Court having assigned us as Solicitors for the State Prisoners, we could not, however injurious to our private interests, after accepting the appointment, abandon their defence; buton the contrary every professional exertion was exercised by us on their behalf, and as much so, as if we had received the £1000 so grossly misrepresented to the Public to have been collected, paid, and misapplied.

I am, Sir, &c.,  
Robt. Bond.  
9th January, 1818.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000172/18180221/007/0001
Leicester Chronicle - Saturday 21 February 1818

HOUSE OF COMMONS.

Wednesday, Feb. 11.

PROCEEDINGS RESPECTING SPIES, &C.

Mr. Fazakerley observed, that in the Report of the Secret Committee of last Session, it was stated, that the langaage and conduct of certain persons, who had been employed to watch the movements of the disaffected, might have contributed to encourage the practices which it was the object of Government to suppress. He wished therefore to ask, whether any steps had been taken to bring the persons alluded to justice?—(Hear, hear!) During the Suspension Laws, the jails were crowded by the victims of these Spies and Informers, and itinerant State Prisoners were paraded about the country, exhibiting as strange a mixture of strong and weak measures as had ever distinguished any Administration,—(Hear, hear!)—Multitudes had been taken up and then dismissed without trial, and cause whatever appeared for such conduct. Inquiry was therefore in every way necessary. The Hon. Member concluded by moving, "That instructions be given to the Secret Committee, to examine and report, whether any and what measures had been taken to detect and bring to justice all or any of those persons who had been described in the Secret Report of June 1817, as having been in any manner the cause of the disturbances which look place last year."

*Mr. C. Bathurst* said, the Hon. Gentleman was mistaken in imagining that the Report had designated the Spies as the cause of the disaffection: the Report said no such thing, though it admitted that the conduct of certain individuals sent to procure information, was calculated to encourage disaffection. Those persons were not the authors of the disturbances which had taken place, though they must of course have seemed to encourage the disaffection it was meant put down. Before Oliver went among them, meetings had been held. When persons were detected in their guilt, it was common for them to turn round and accuse of guilt those who had so detected them—(Hear!)—In fact, not one individual had been arrested on the information of Oliver, nor was it on his evidence that the Habeas Corpus Act had been suspended—(Hear, hear!)—Under all the circumstances, he saw no reason why Government should be called upon to proceed against persons who had only procured proper information, and he should oppose the motion.

*Lord Milton* observed, that if ever should become a Spy, he would not wish a better master than the Right Hon. Gentleman—(Laughter)—for he should be sure of being defended by him in any thing he should do. The House, however, would not do its duty unless it entered on a diligent inquiry. It was too much to hear the conduct of Spies treated with so little esteem in that House—(Hear, hear!)—instead of viewing with proper indignation.

*Mr. C, Grant, jun.* argued that it was the duty of Government to act on the information of agents; and as no extraordinary ground had been shown for interference, he should oppose the motion.

*Mr. Bennett* said, that if a case could be made out, the country would be satisfied that this was one of the grossest juggles that any Ministers had ventured to impose the people. He did not wish to give any general opinion on the employment of Spies, but he knew that they were edge-tools which were very dangerous to be handled.— Some wretched individuals at Manchester and other places had been induced to accept the sanguinary employment of spies by a small addition to their weekly earnings. He held in his hand a pamphlet published by Capt. Raines, of the Militia, in which the author stated that he had procured persons to join Luddites, and take a horrid oath, for the purpose of breaking it and betraying others who took it. The Right Hon. Gentleman had given a sort of challenge respecting the character of the persons lately employed, which he would meet. To begin with Castles—he was a bully, an utterer of forged notes, and had been a Spy before under the Transport Office. Another, Oliver, had began his career by being guilty of bigamy, and the rest of his character was equally bad: he owed to the mercy of a benefactor, he had basely injured, the infamous life which be now held. On the 24th of April, Oliver set out for Liverpool.— He afterwards went to Leeds and Manchester, where he called on most respectable persons.— Wherever he went he insisted on the absolute necessity of physical force, and the uselessness of petitioning. At one meeting on the 5th of May, when there were ten delegates present, Oliver had desired a person to write down and sign a list of the number of those who would join, which he (Mr. Bennett) firmly believed was the origin of the assertion in the Report of the Secret Committee, that lists of men and arms had been prepared; and he believed that Oliver had been at Derby. The Hon. Gentleman then read an affidavit, which gave an account of Oliver's proceedings Derby, his having attended a meeting there, where he said, that all the rest of the country was ready to rise, and that 60,000 proclamations had been printed by Mr. Wooler. &c. It further stated, that he (Oliver), saw Brandreth on the 16th. He read a part of Brandreth's own statement, made to his Solicitor in confidence, which confessed the acts he had been accused of but showed how he had been instigated: it mentioned his meeting with Oliver, who repeated the same story that he had every where told.— Oliver then went to Nottingham and Birmingham with the same mischievous intent. One very material fact was, that tranquillity was restored the very day that Oliver ceased his employment.— Great distress had existed, of which some factious men had taken advantage, but their designs could have inspired no fear, had not Oliver been present to stimulate and direct them.—It had been said, that if Oliver had instigated the men at Derby, he might have been called at evidence; he was certainly on the spot, ready to purchase the blood-money of Brandreth; but to ?have called him would have proved the very guilt which they denied. This argument was a disgrace—(Loud cries of hear, hear!)—a disgrace to the justice of the country. He was prepared to prove the truth of his assertions by oaths and credible witnesses—(Hear, heart)—most credible witnesses; and he challenged the Hon. and Learned Gentleman to show they were not—(Hear, hear!)—The Noble Lord might cry hear, hear! and deny the motion in that House; but that would not do with the country before which they stood, and a verdict would be such as the enormity of the case deserved!

*Mr. Wilberforce* objected to the motion, as it was founded on a false assumption. He did not mean to say that nothing of the disturbance was to be attributed to Oliver; but what had just been stated came also from a doubtful source; and he should like to hear what Oliver would say to the charges against him.—(Hear, hear!)—If they were true, it would be a service to the public to bring him to justice. With respect to the employment of Spies, it was certainly not allowable in religious view. The God of Truth abhorred falsehood and deceit; and even in a political point, though their employment might at times produce temporary advantages, yet, when he considered all the distrust which such a system must occasion—when he considered the temptations to false information of every description—the suspicions and disaffection that must be excited against the Government itself, and the general confusion such system would excite—he was of opinion that their employment was false policy.—[Hear, hear!]—He for one condemned the practice; the country and the Government would lose more than they gained by them. But, notwithstanding all that had been said by the disaffected, and notwithstanding all the real sufferings of the people in a season of distress, this country enjoyed a greater share of liberty, than had been ever possessed in any age or by any other nation—there never was a more prosperous, a moral, or a happier nation! Still, by the use of such agents, the people would have their principles perverted and their sympathies turned in favour of their worst enemies. No; the British nation did not stand in need of the assistance of such base associates—(Loud cries of hear!)—He must say, however, he was against the motion itself, (Hear, and laughter) because it involved an inquiry which could not be carried on in the Committee.

The *Solicitor General* denied that the passage in the Report would bear the construction now put upon it: it in fact imputed nothing that could be the foundation of a criminal indictment. The Hon. Gentleman (Mr. Bennet) had not given the names of the persont from whom he derived his information; but he had mentioned the name of Mitchell, and this was a clue to the rest. That person had been charged with treason, and was therefore to be thought a proper witness to depreciate the characters of those who had been employed to detect his designs? Then there was Pendril and Stephen, who had fled to America, and they might have furnished the information. Did a charge of treason increase the credibility of the persons so charged? [Hear!] He knew that, nowadays, persons who had been brought before Court of Justice were deemed proper objects of the bounty and patronage of the public. By raising a cry against Oliver and the Spies, they thought they could shift from themselves the load of criminality, and impute the whole to a Government conspiracy—(Hear, hear!)—Oliver, forsooth, had done all the mischief! The Hon. Gentleman had said, that Oliver was ready to be produced at Derby sell the blood of the prisoners: but he could not have been produced as a witness, for he was not on the list furnished to the prisoners. He allowed, that had Oliver been called by the prisoners, his testimony must have gone to convict them: but if they could have proved that they had been deluded by him into crime, it would have operated in their favour when they were called up for judgment. Nothing had been proved which tended to shew that Oliver had arranged the conspiracy. He had now shown that the motion was unnecessary, as it was founded on a mistake of the meaning of the Report.

*Sir S. Romilly* remarked, that after the charges brought by his Hon. Friend, which he had to substantiate on oath, he thought the House should not dare to resist inquiry into the truth. But the Learned Gentleman suspected that the information came from what he termed a polluted source.— Mitchell, had been arrested, —no matter on what evidence,—had heen imprisoned, and therefore his evidence was inadmissible! Thus a new expedient had been discovered by one the first Law Officers of the Crown, for disqualifying any evidence that might be brought against Ministers. According to this new plan. Government had only to throw an obnoxious individual into prison, and then his testimony would become incredible—(Hear, hear !)—The moment he was taken up, he would lose both his liberty and his character!— Such reasoning, however, could not affect the charge nor satisfy the country. The Hon. Gentleman (Mr. Wilberforce) had strongly censured the employment of Spies. It was very singular, however, that deeming them pests of society, and showing that their encouragement led to all sorts of mischief, he had yet voted against the motion, which would lead to inquiry! It was a subject, he said, of vital importance; and yet he refused to take a single step which would lead to a suppression of the evil! —If, concluded Sir Samuel, the motion was negatived, as he believed it would be, he hoped that the Hon. Member for Bramber (Mr. Wilberforce) would came forward with a motion consistent with his speech, some early day, to inquire into the recent encouragement of Spies, whose employment he deemed so destructive of the happiness, morality, mid religion of the community.— (Hear, hear!)

*Mr. Canning* observed, that the House would doubtless do its duty, notwithstanding the organized abouts and unorganized speeches of the other side. If Ministers had acted improperly, let the accusation be made, and it would be fairly met; but the present motion was a silly mockery, perfectly childish and unmeaning. The Committee had been described as one possessing neither common talents nor common honesty,—which had been assembled for the purpose of deluding the nation—(Cheers)—and yet these were the men who were now to be trusted with these vital matters, these high interests! This was truly a very consistent course. The Committee were pronounced incompetent, yet they were now to be burthened with fresh and solemn labours!—(Continued Cheers!)—it was a waste of time to talk on such a subject. It had been alleged that last year alarms had been spread by the agents of Governments: Government, however, could not go on were they to refuse information respecting plots. Suppose information had reached them of the existence of a revolutionary spirit, not arising from any temporary distresses, and this information had come from the Lord Lieutenant of the West Riding of Yorkshire (Earl Fitzwiliam) and not from some petty authority,—would Government be satisfied in passing it over? The Lord Lieutenant, indeed, affected to look back with surprise at the arts which had been practised, but Government were justified in acting upon his information, though he afterwards might change his opinion. Disaffection did exist, and it was necessary to probe it to the bottom, and they were obliged to avail themselves of the means within their reach. No person of common humanity or principle would set a man on to seduce others into crime: but when it was, "Will you avail yourself of this man's information, or let the State go to wreck,"—he felt little hesitation here as in the other alternative. If none but unsullied characters were to be employed, the State might be ruined before such could be found. Oliver had not fomented the disturbances; he had merely given information of what he saw and heard.—Mr. Canning, on concluding his speech, was loudly cheered by the Ministerial side of the House.

*Mr. Tierney* argued, that if the Officers of the Crown did justice to the people as to the Government, they would have prosecuted the Spies before this time. But the Government did not dare to touch a hair of Oliver's head: his retort upon them be would more than they could endure.—[Hear, hear!]—The House was called upon to quiet the disgust that generally prevailed against the employment of Spies: if they refused this motion, they proved they were not alive to the liberties of the people.—[Continued cheering.]—If inquiry was refused, suspicion must attach to some of the highest characters in the country. The letter from Earl Fitzwilliam was dated in December 1816; but strong measures were not proposed till the following February, nor till after an unfortunate pebble had been thrown in the Park! He admitted that there was disaffection; but it was caused by distress: and it was proved that not one man among the disaffected was of a higher rank than a weaver. Far the greater part were paupers—always excepting the moral Mr. Oliver and Co. If Oliver had not excited the disaffection, he had turned it into the only course in which it was likely to be mischievous. Did the House believe that the vote of a majority would set this question at rest? He wished to speak in measured terms; but he must warn the House not to trespass too far the temper and patience of the people, [Hear, hear!]

*Lord Milton* said, that one letter had been produced, while another had been kept back.—[Hear, hear!]

*Lord Castlereagh* complained that this was an unfair statement.

The House divided—

For the motion 58
Against it  113

Second Majority against all inquiry, 53.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000172/18180314/001/0001
Leicester Chronicle - Saturday 14 March 1818

Just published price Sixpence.

Proceedings in the House of Commons on the nights of Monday the 9th, and Wednesday the 11th of February, 1818, relating to the SPY SYSTEM:—

I.— As exhibited by the Petition and Exposition presented by Mr. Phillips of the conduct of Messrs. Lomax, Dewhirst and Waddington, in the neighbourhood of Manchester, &c.

II.—In the operations of Oliver, in the counties of Warwick, Derby, Nottingham, Lancaster and York.

In which the whole of the speeches on both sides of the House, are given at full length, from the Morning Chronicle and Courier newspapers.



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000172/18180411/017/0003
Leicester Chronicle - Saturday 11 April 1818

THE LEEDS PLOT.

*(From the Leeds Mercury.)*

While the country was smoothing itself with the hope that the conspiracies against the State, of which they had heard so much, and seen so little, were all at an end; and while even the Argus-eyed vigilance of his Majesty's Ministers slept; a most awful discovery of a plot in which two thousand conspirators are engaged has been made in Leeds! It seems "that one hundred petitions, signed by twenty persons each praying for Reform, were presented at the House of Commons, in the beginning of this month, from the town of Leeds; and so profound was the secrecy with which these Petitions were got up, that the Printer of the *Leeds Intelligencer*, whose sagacity is almost equal to his moderation, "has not been able to learn that any one person, except the alleged Petitioners themselves, knew these Petitions were in Progress in the town, or had heard of them until they were presented to the House." The conspiring mind implied in the obtaining of these two thousand signatures, without the knowledge of a soul but the alleged Petitioners, is announced as one of the most alarming facts that has occurred in the whole progress of the existing disaffection— and the persons engaged in the plot, are denounced as "a band of close conspiring villains." To add to the horrors of this discovery, the Printer of the *Intelligencer* has heard, but he does not know how truly, that delegates have lately been sent from Huddersfield to London, for the purpose of renewing the machinations of last year; and, in conclusion, it is intimated, that it is necessary again to suspend the Habeas Corpus Act, to prevent the congregating of another "concourse of these scoundrels in the Metropolis." The *Courier*, who is a fellow labourer in the vocation of alarm creating, has copied part of the *Intelligencer's news*; but the terms villains and scoundrels were too gross even for the columns of that Paper, and the Editor has very properly omitted such outrageous epithets.

We believe that there are very few persons upon whom this political hoax is calculated to impose, but it may notwithstanding, be necessary in order to calm the tremulous nerves of those who are prone to be alarmed by phantoms, to say, that so far from any secresy prevailing on the subject of the Petitions a letter from Major Cartwright, recommending petitioning by twenties, was inserted in is this paper before the petitions were set on foot— that many of the signatures were obtained upon a table, placed for successive market-days near the Market Cross *(within about two hundred yards of the Leeds Intelligencer Office)* —and that, so far from a knowledge of the Petitions being confined to two thousand persons though that is a pretty round number, ten thousand of the inhabitants at least were in the secret. The history of the transaction we find on enquiry, to be this:— a number of men, principally, if not altogether in the labouring classes, thinking it proper to renew their Petitions for Annual Parliaments and Universal Suffrage, handed about each a sheet of paper, with a short form of Petition inscribed upon the head of it; and we believe there are very few workshops or manufactories in the town, in which the petitions were not openly displayed as they were upon the tables in the open the public market.
