# Pentrich Remembered

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000174/18180206/004/0002
Morning Post - Friday 06 February 1818
p2-3
State of the nation report and debate thereafter;

p2 MR. PHILLIPS thought no measure could have the effect of producing disrespect so much as a partial tribunal of this kind. This was not merely the case of Ministers, but that of the country at large; it was the case of those districts where traitorous purposes had been carried on, as well as the case of those persons who had been detained during the Suspension. He was of opinion, that much more effectual measures mignt have been taken than by sending spies and informers about to delude an ignorant and unfortunate people. If these persons had been withdrawn instead of encouraged, a real advantage would have been derived. There was said to be a connexion amongst insurgents in different parts of the country; but we had seen no such connexion proved, except the connexion amongst the spies. The Hon. Gentleman, alluding to the incendiary projects in Lancashire, observed, that he believed he had traced that plot to its origin, and that it was owing to the spies and informers only; and he had no doubt whatever, that this fact, as far as it regarded Lancashire, could be proved. It was almost similar to what took place in 1812, when spies and informers were paid by the Magistrates, and the most dreadful confusion in consequence ensued. All this was fully proved in a publication by Dr. Taylor, late of Bolton, and now of Liverpool. When spies were thus encouraged, much allowance ought to be made by Ministers as to the sources from which they drew their information. Individuals were pointed out as engaged in a horrible conspiracy to burn Manchester, yet those who were stigmatized as the leaders in such plots had been taken up, kept in confinement, and at last liberated without trial. although we were still told that such a conspiracy did exist. But was it not likely that such men should be sent back with much more power to do mischief than they had before, by being represented as martyrs in the cause if Liberty? Instead of being surpised that the minds of poor people should be in a state of agitation from the conduct of these spies, it was only surprising that much more mischief did not ensue; and when the facts came before the House, no doubt Gentlemen would be as much surprised at it as he was himself. They had only been taught, when half-starting, to look up for relief to Parliamentary Reform; and though it was known that there were between 800 and 900,000 men in this alarming state in Lancashire and its neighbbourhood, so far from any serious project being discovered, nothing of any consequence was found out. Now, supposing, instead of sending spies and informers to delude and deceive these poor people they had sent persons to reason with and console them, how different might have been the result. But as no mischief did arise, it was a strong presumption that Government was in the wrong.

Mr. WYNNE thought it would have been better if all discussion had been postponed till the question had passed of referring the papers to a Committee; but as so much had been said, he owed it to the House and himself to declare, that his opinion of the propriety of the Suspension of the Habeas Carpus Act last year remained unchanged; that its necessity had been proved by the circumstances that had transpired at the different trials, and that it was his firm conviction that the country had been rescued by it from the greatest dangers— *(Hear, hear, hear!)—* It had been said that Government might have prevented what happened by taking ordinary precaution, and apprehending, under the ordinary powers, the suspected leaders of the conspiracies.— (Mr. Tierney here explained his precise words, which he conceived had been misapprehended by the Honourable Gentleman.)—Was it, however, to be concluded, that because these men were not brought to trial that no conspiracy had been going on? It was positively sworn at Derby, that those persons were fed with the constant hope that assistance would arrive to them from different parts of the kingdom. *(Hear, hear, hear!)* He believed this was not without foundation, and he also believed they would have proceeded to more open action, if they has not been restrained by the measures which had taken place, and for which he had given his vote, though he was not a member of the Committee. Indeed, in Yorkshire, it was known there was an armed body prepared, drawn out, and firing on the King's troops (*Hear!*) Yet, although it may not have been brought home to individuals, the fact itself was quite clear. But then it was said, why were the trials so conducted as not to show the full extent of the conspiracy, by the examination of the informers? He would answer, that this was not the duty of the Crown Officers; their duty was to bring home treason, according to the proofs they had of its existence. Indeed he saw ample reason why those persons should not have been brought forward. Suppose Brandreth, Turner, and Ludlam had been taken up after that meeting, when they arranged their operations. If the informers had been brought forward, it would have been said. "You are spies; you were present at that meeting; you are not proper evidence!" He felt convinced that if those men had been prevented from breaking out, they could not have been convicted on the evidence, perfectly true as it appeared to be, because the evidence would have been mistrusted. He therefore thought great utility had arisen from the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, which enabled Government to take up persons and not to release them till the danger was over. Such precautions were wise, prudent, and justifiable. Entertaining this opinion, he saw no reason to repent of the vote he had given last year; with respect to the present question, he saw no cause to doubt of the propriety of proceeding by ballot, as the Members would be elected by a majority of the House. Proceedings by ballot had, in every instance of cases of this sort, been resorted to in order to lessen the influence of Ministers, because it was supposed voters would not be under the same control as if they had given their votes in the House. He quoted some precedents in point, and concluded with repeating, that he saw not the slightest reason for refusing to appoint the Committee by ballot.

Sir W. BURROWES denied that the events that had occurred since the last Sessions, had fully justified the measures that had been adopted. His opinion was directly the contrary. The Hon. and Learned Baronet proceeded to review the proceedings from the presentation of the first Report, ridiculing the statements it contained of the tremendous operations in contemplation of a broken down farmer, a half-starved apothecary, and two coblers. In the second Report, all the disaffection so applied to the capital was sunk, and it was specifically declared that no connexion subsisted between the conspiracies here and in the country. It had been said that 5000 placards had been posted up inviting the people to rise and destroy the Government. Was there any attempt to prove this on the trial of Watson? None at all. Now as to Derby, his opinion was directly contrary to that of the Honourable Gentleman who spoke last. The civil magistrates were perfectly competent to seize and commit the leaders, armed only with their ordinary powers. For the justification of Government he thought some such evidence as that which the Hon. Gent. thought improper, ought to have been brought forward. The ground of defence was that the rioters were out of bread, and the Learned Judge, in his charge, left it to the Jury to decide whether there was any particular object and concert amongst them. If this connexion had been proved by the evidence of the informers, and that their object was general destruction, including the Constitution, could it have been doubted that their Conduct was high treason? It would have excluded the arguments of Council, as to their having no particular object in view, while it would have disclosed who were the real instigators. One unhappy culprit had declared expressly in his last moments, that he imputed to Oliver the crime he had committed. Then why not have produced him? It would have shown that it was not for general purposes, but for a particular object that they had risen. But Ministers saw they had no chance but by shifting the scene to Manchester, after the trial of Watson. How then would they answer to the public for discharging those men who had been imprisoned without any trial whatever, after charging them with going deliberately to work to overturn the Government; thus committing an overt act of high treason? They had thus avowed, that none of the grounds contained in the Second Report were sufficient to authorise the proceedings that had been adopted. As to the charge of disaffection, had not the general feeling on a late melancholy event proved that there was a more general attachment to the House of Brunswick and the Constitution, than then prevailed amongst people of every class and station? As to the mode of ballot, he denied that it was not more exceptionable than that by vote, and argued that the object of the measure before the House was a posthumous justification of the measures of the last Session. Did they mean to move for a continuation of that part of the Act of last Session which related to the preventing of suspicious meetings, and which would expire in July? If not, he saw no prospective measure they could have in view but that of indemnity. The Noble Lord had said this night, in plain terms, that some abuses or violations of the law had taken place. Then it amounted to this: that Parliament had confided to them extraordinary powers, and they had even exceeded them, by keeping her sons in jail, and then dismissing them without any trial. How were these men to obtain redress for the injuries they had sustained, but by bringing actions? and yet they were to be deprived of all remedy by a Report from Members appointed by Ministers themselves, and without an opportunity of being heard by going before the Committee. In his judgment this was one of the most violent proceedings that Parliament had ever recorded, and he entreated the House to pause before they put such powers into the hands of Ministers, by giving them the privilege of the ballot.

Sir J. SEBRIGHT declared, that after having read and considered the Report of the_ Committee, he thought the state of rise country required that Act, strong as it certainly was; and he was one of these who would always be ready to strengthen the hands of Government whenever it was necessary to put down conspirators of any description. But he owed it to himself and the country to state, that on that occasion he was grossly deceived. (*Loud cries of Hear, hear! from the Opposition benches.*) Perhaps Gentlemen would not honour him with cheers when they heard that it was not his intention to impute to Ministers any deception. (*Here the cheers were loudly repeated from the Ministerial side.*) But although he fully exonerated Ministers from all suspicion of any intention to deceive, it did not appear to him, from any thing that had come to his knowledge, that the ordinary laws of the country might not have been sufficient to restore tranquillity. He took no blame to himself for his vote; but in his humble opinion the events had not justified the measures that had been resorted to. — (*Hear, hear!*)

Mr. ELLISON contended that no one could believe otherwise than that Brandreth had had a gross falsehood imposed on him respecting Oliver, at the time of his examination. That we were in danger he had no doubt; but thank God we had subdued it. He could state, from his own experience as a Magistrate, that there had been emissaries going about the country, to excite the people to outrages. But he thought that if Parliament had not acted as they had done, they would have been guilty of a dereliction of their duty, and if they could not make out a good case, he would pledge himself to vote against them. He protested against that sort of blasphemous and seditious trash with which we were inundated, and the object of which was to demoralize the country.

History of the Derbyshire Insurrection
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000365/18171129/016/0004

Carlisle Patriot - Saturday 29 November 1817
[From the Observer newspaper] SEE ELSEWHERE eg 62_Frank_Ward_libel.md

Also a report of funeral of Princess Charlotte
Joseph Mitchell? Thomas Savage?


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000050/18180516/002/0008?browse=true
Cobbett's Weekly Political Register - Saturday 16 May 1818
Deposition of William Stevens re: Thomas Bacon and William Oliver
Cobbett's Weekly Political Register - Saturday 16 May 1818 -facts relating to William Oliver


Summary of the affair
Cobbett's Weekly Political Register - Saturday 25 April 1818
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000050/18180425/001/0001?browse=true TO Henry Hunt

Henry Hunt British radical


https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=5j1cAAAAcAAJ&printsec=frontcover&dq=%22green+bag%22+hunt&hl=en&newbks=1&newbks_redir=0&sa=X&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q=%22green%20bag%22%20hunt&f=false
The Green Bag Plot; Being a Detailed Account of Some of the Transactions which ... Led to the Suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, Including an Extract from the Green Bag, Purporting to be a Memorandum Relative to the Origin of the Conspiracy at Pentridge ... which Ended in ... the Execution of Brandreth Turner, & Ludlam for High Treason
Front Cover
Henry HUNT (M.P., for Preston.)
1819
Incl notes on Thomas bacon
Provides an a/c of Pentrich revolt


ALso a response:
https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=a6FhAAAAcAAJ&printsec=frontcover&source=gbs_ge_summary_r&cad=0#v=onepage&q&f=false
A Reply to the Falsehoods of Mr. Hunt
Front Cover
Thomas Cleary
J. Onwhyn, 1819

As well as Pentrich, e.g. Pentridge (eg in Hunt/Green Bag)

