
https://archive.org/details/gentlemansmagaz376unkngoog/page/322/mode/2up?q=pentrich
The Gentleman's magazine
VOL. CCLXXXIX. NO. 2

September 1900

pp323-335

THE LAST ENGLISH REBELLION.

THE first two decades of the nineteenth century are a record of continual riot and disaffection. The exhausting effects of the long foreign wars had fostered a spirit of domestic discontent The land was weary. Moreover, the working class was suffering under an additional stress — the competition of new steam-power inventions. The hard-faring peasant had been taught through centuries of experience to bear with quiet sullenness the vicissitudes of his lot; but the artisan and millworker hotly resented the advent of the New Force which threatened to drive him out of existence. The weaver, as Luddite and Plug-destroyer and what not, was waging desperate war against a relentless adversary which, eating no bread, threatened to deprive him of the last crumb of his already small loaf.

In this critical state of the social economy the Government seemed powerless. It could disperse mobs and prosecute disorderly persons, but it had no preventive remedy. The steam-engine was a hard fact: it boded extinction to the hard worker, and the "hand," gleaning no spark of reassurance or encouragement from the alarmed powers that be, turned "bersark," there being so little to choose between the board and lodging of the gaol and that of the poor-house. So the authorities were face to face with the pitiful fact that ordinary punishment added no suffering to the everyday misery of the wretched delinquent.


TO DO

In this state of public affairs it was determined to quiet the country by what was termed "making examples." It was a vague, blundering resolve, bred of the uncertainty of the times— a hitting out all round in the dark. "If these rioters, or a few of them, can by the jugglery of the law be adjudged traitors, we will offer a sacrifice that the land may have rest," reasoned the advisers of the Prince Regent. But a real traitor was a scarce article; murders and other hanging matters were, alas! of plentiful occurrence, but rioting, though a breach of the King's peace, was not an offence against the King's person or power. The fismiished mobs which sacked factories and destroyed spinning jennies neither usurped the regal authority nor threatened the throne.

The emissaries of the Government, however, set about their task as best they could. Do not let us judge harshly. It is only in accordance with the facts to assert that the prime authorities were honestly convinced that treason was abroad: it is but natural to suppose that the executive would be warned to be on the qui vive for treasonable acts; the executive, moreover, would require the assistance of subordinates, and so in the process of delq;ation would come into existence a body of spies and secret informers.

One of the latter class was a man named Oliver. The movements of this person came to be noticed in the month of May 1817, when he was actively engaged among the Yorkshire workers, where his operations culminated in a trade riot at Thomhill Lees, near Dewsbury, on June 8. Oliver was arrested, along with several of the ringleaders, but almost immediately set at liberty, without magisterial enquiry. What became of the others we need not enquire; he at any rate deemed it prudent to quietly disappear from the neighbourhood. But in the meantime he had made the acquaintance of a Derbyshire countryman named Bacon, whose kinswoman kept the White Horse Inn at Pentrich, a village which will be referred to later on. Bacon, under the tutelage of the crafty Oliver, soon became an attached adherent of the disaffected party, and the effects of this acquaintanceship had far-reaching and most unfortunate effects.

Whilst the Dewsbury riot was in process of hatching, Oliver, after a visit to London, made an excursion to Nottingham, arriving there on the morning of May 26 in company with a Mr. Biricin, by whom he was introduced to several men as the "London delegate." One of these was Jeremiah Brandreth. The same evening a consultation took place between Oliver and the men in a private room of the Three Salmons. What transpired at this meeting is deposed to by various and opposite parties. Oliver, while admitting that he was there as a spy, privately declared that he never directly encouraged by word or deed any outbreak against law and order. On the other hand, it is specifically allied by more than one of those present that Oliver was the main speaker, and that he was the author of those fanciful delusions which proved the ruin of the Derbyshire "rebels."

The scene changes, and time has progressed somewhat One morning, some three weeks after the Nottingham meeting, or, to be precise, on Sunday morning, June 8, the White Horse Inn, Pentrich, was the scene of a memorable gathering. Nanny Weightman's public-house was abnormally busy, and, as the

foundrymen from Butterly Furnace and others strolled in, Nanny herself briskly invited them into the bar-room. The licensing laws of that day did not enforce Sunday closing, so there was no breach of privilege in having her premises open at 10 o'clock on the Sabbath mom, though, strictly speaking, we believe the churchwardens or constable should have seen that all inns were closed during the hours of divine service.

This, however, is only a detail: matters of deeper importance than a breach of the Innkeepers' Acts were being discussed in the bar pariour of the White Horse. Nanny Weightman, poor soul, was jubilant, thrilling with the same glorious expectations which had so uplifted Zebedee's wife; for her son George, a tall, striding young man with a fine red £Eu:e, and her kinsman Bacon, were destined to be the chief men in that better England which was coming "in the days of pretty soon."

Pentrich, we may mention, is a small East Derbyshire village, in the coal and iron-stone part of the county. In its neighbourhood were the Butterly Ironworks, which employed such of the men as were not engaged in agriculture. Wingfield, with its ancient manor house, lies close by, and the old market town of Chesterfield, crowned with its fietmous crooked spire and threaded with its equally crooked lanes and alleys, is the metropolis of the locality.

The object of this Sunday conference was nothing less than the overthrow of the British Constitution. It may be noted as a curious circumstance that treason seems to have "stalked" pretty freely and frequently in this district Anthony Babington, the young Elizabethan plotter (whose end was the scaffold) was of Wingfield Manor; likewise the first Duke of Devonshire and his fellow patriots held secret meeting in the old Revolution House, near Chesterfield, the outcome of which was the "Sacred Revolution" of 168S.

Around the smoke-room mahogany of the White Horse there sat Jeremiah Brandreth (whose acquaintance the reader has already made, and who, by-the-bye, was a frame-work knitter by occupation); William Turner, stonemason; Isaac Ludlam, a carter; and Nanny Weightman's George. These were the destined leaders and organisers of a new party, which was to provide a larger loaf for the working man, and to inaugurate a millennium of cakes and ale. Brandreth, or, as he was called, the Nottingham Captain, was a stranger to the Pentrich villagers. He represented himself as coming from ''headquarters" to take charge of the local contingent, and conduct them to Nottingham Forest. Brandreth is an enigma. He had been heard of once before, viz. at the Three Salmons


meeting, but nothing ever transpired afterwards as to the circumstances which led to his ill-fated appointment The same uncertainty surrounds his personal history. It has been said that he came from Exeter, and had at one time been a seaman: he was a short-statured, grim-visaged person, clad in the garb of the working class, but a man of some intelligence and education, and of considerable natmal powers — a rude leader of men. This Sunday morning he was mifolding to his colleagues and to all and sundry who called at the "White Horse" his scheme for deposing the Govemment Ljrii^opeci in front of him was a map of England, "with canvas at the bade of it and crosses upon it so as to find out places." The teniM* of his mission was expressed in some doggerel which he recited, beginning:—

Every man his skill must try,  
He must turn out and not deny;  
No bloody soldier must he drnd,

He must turn out and fight for bread;

The time must come, you plainly see

The Government c^yposed must be.

He mformed his audience that great events would shortly come to pass, and especially emphasised the assurance that the country was only waiting for the Pentrich men to take the initiative.

After much arrangement and scheming, which lasted until the afternoon, the main plan was sketched out as follows. Such a force as was aheady prepared to act were to assemble at a given time at South Wingfield, which is a mile or so from Pentrich: they were to march thence, through Pentrich on to Butterly Ironworks, where a halt was to be made, it being anticipated that the ironworkers would join them. The furnace works were to be taken possession of and the cannons understood to be kept there seized. The works were to be garrisoned as a base for the supply of offensive weapons. The march was then to be continued through certain towns and villages to Nottingham Forest, a distance of about fourteen miles. A list of persons known to have guns was drawn iqi, and these people were to be raided and their weapons appropriated by the insurgents. Moreover, it was resolved that a barrel of gunpowder should be procured, and bullets were to be provided as required by stripping the lead from church roofs on the line of route. Those improvided with guns were to be armed with pikes (or "spikes," as these desperate folks called them).

Such was the crazy scheme, and it appears to have met with the full approval of most of Nanny Weightman's customers. Brandreth

nformed his adherents that by the time they reached Nottingham London would have £Edlen into the hands of the new party, and a fresh Government, which purposed first of all to wipe off the National Debt, would be in power. A "cloud from the North" — the rebels of Lancashire and Yorkshire — were to follow in the wake of the devastating hosts of Pentrich and Wingfield, to eat up the remnant of the land and complete the destruction of the well-to-do. Nottingham was to be their goal, and Nottingham was to be a second Capuse, a place of unlimited rations, "rum for every man and a hundred guineas apiece." It was a promise of fulness, almost too rosy to be true; but the Obtain disarmed all suspicion by arranging for old George Weightman, who possessed everybody's confidence, to proceed on foot to Nottingham and ascertain for himself the state of affairs — a collection being made in the room to pay his expenses. George was ordered to return the next day, and all parties were to assemble at Hunt's Bam, in Wingfield, by dark on Monday evening, to make final preparations.

Monday night found the neighbourhood in a great stir. Men were openly making their way to the rendezvous, not however with the stem, set &ces common to those who are about to do or die, but rather in a disposition of grinning good-humour. Everybody in the place seemed to be aware of this famous shindy, and there was no aid of hilarity as neighbours met and chaffed with one another. The authorities, however, were not asleep, although little open activity on their part was apparent. Perhaps it would have been more honest if they had exercised their authority at the outset.

The gathering at Hunt's Bam numbered about two score, including Brandreth, Turner, and the other ringleaders. There was some more speech-making. England, Ireland, and France were to rise simultaneously at ten o'clock that night; consequently the highest spirits prevailed among the rebels. William Turner, the young stonemason, was appointed lieutenant to Brandreth, as being the leading Wingfield insurgent and as having special knowledge where guns were to be found. So fiar the party only boasted of two or three firearms, the rest carrying eight-foot pikes, rudely barbed with iron: these latter had been made and secreted in Hunt's Bam some time beforehand.

It is pretty certain that this gang of misguided villagers never realised the consequences when they thus sallied forth with weapons in their hands. The Nottingham Captain amused them with his strange talk: he had doubtless also paid for a good deal of ale the day previous, and would very likely pay for some more, and — well

— if his wonderful predictions did not come to pass, it was only a night's spree which would vary the monotony of their hard lot As for Brandreth himself, we repeat he is an enigma; what he thought or believed nobody can telL

The first anxiety was to increase the slender fighting force and to collect firearms, because even these bonny fighters realised that two score men without arms could neither sack a town nor violently overturn a government So a house to house call was made Most of the farmers had gone to bed, and the insurrectionists had to make a terrific uproar to waken them up. When the good man had been brought to the house door or the chamber window, the argle-bargling would begin — the gun had gone to be mended, or it was out of order, or there was no gun. Sometimes it was a man who was commandeered — a farmer's son or a farm hand. Then there would be half angry, half jocular protestations, and the unwilling conscript would either be persuaded to join, or, if very obstinate, he would be allowed to go to bed again. If he joined the rebel standard he was provisionally armed with a "spike" Or a pitchfork. Brandreth was the only one who conducted himself seriously, and it was he who perpetrated one act of unquestionable crime. Towards eleven o'clock Mrs. Hepworth's farmhouse was raided. This woman, together with her two daughters, a son, and two men servants, were aroused by noises all round the house. The gun was demanded, and at the same time a shot fired by the Captain struck and mortally wounded one of the servants. This violent act sobered the party, and one of them remonstrated with the leader for the murder of "that poor innocent lad." Brandreth desperately ordered his followers to hold their peace, and threatened to serve some of them the same. About this time another scout — young Weightman— was sent forward on a pony to Nottingham to reconnoitre.

After collecting as many men and arms in Wingfield and Pentrich as was considered expedient, Brandreth proceeded, with the help of one Swaine, a militiaman, to form his band into military array. By this time they numbered about one hundred. The next and most important move was to obtain possession of Butterly Ironworks — situate about one-and-a-half miles distant — and to enlist as many of the workers as possible for the purpose of manufacturing weapons. Butterly had, however, made special preparation for the visit: nearly one hundred special constables had been hurriedly sworn in, and this loyal force, under the charge of George Goodwin, was quartered in the buildings. Just after daybreak the garrison.



having remained unmolested all night, concluded that the disturbance had settled, and dispersed to their homes, leaving only twenty-five pikemen with Mr. Goodwin. Unfortunately, their surmise proved incorrect, for between three and four o'clock on the Tuesday morning Brandreth and his party made their appearance on the Pentrich road. Rain had fallen in torrents during the first hours of the morning, and, impervious as the Derbyshire native may be to the effects of bad weather, it must nevertheless have been daunting and dispiriting to the rebels at this time. The Captain marched his men right on to the gates of Butterly, and lined them up in front He then approached the gates, and, knocking at them with the butt end of his gun, called on the defenders to surrender. Mr. Goodwin, the manager, has described the redoubtable Brandreth as he appeared on this interesting occasion: "He gave the command to 'Right face, front!' He had a gun in his hand and a pistol in his belt, which looked like an apron twisted round him." "?? Standing by him were his lieutenants, "?? Isaac Ludlam the elder with a spear, James Taylor with a gun, and Isaac Moore with a fork." Mr. Goodwin came forward to parley, but not to capitulate. He administered to Brandreth and his followers a sound lecture, and ordered them to begone—which they did, taking the main road to Derby. The honours of war lay entirely with the besi^ed, and Mr. Goodwin with his own hands captured one prisoner, who had concealed imder his smock-frock a bag containing eighty-four pounds of bullets 1 Verily the satisfaction of that disburdened warrior must have been akin to that of Charles Churchill when he lost both his surplice and wife. "I feel," said the spendthrift poet, "in the

situation of a man who has carried a d d heavy load a long way,

and then sets it down."

The party marched on to Ripley, where they halted and gave "three huzzas to guide the men from Heage and Belper," who were to meet them there. Then they pushed on to Codnor, where they knocked up the landlord of the Glass House Inn. Here, ale to the value of twenty-eight shillings was consumed, Brandreth informing mine host that the shot would be paid later on by the "provisional government" The night had been wretchedly wet, and the attempt on Butterly Ironworks had ended in a foolish fiasco. Some of the rebels had already sneaked away when the Captain's eye was not upon them, flinging their pikes into the nettle-beds on the wayside: the remainder, with drenched smock-frocks clinging round their legs, thought the spree had been carried far enough, and that they had better get back home again in time for work. The good cheer of the Glass

House had failed to impart to the situation a brighter complexion, and it was now as much as the leaders could do to prevent a general disbandment of the forces. At Langley they fell in with George Weightman, returning from Nottingham, whither he had been despatched early in the night Weightman, resolute to the last, answered the eager enquiries of his comrades with an improbable lie, grossly transparent even to those who had already swallowed so much. "All is right, my lads," he assured them; "you have nothing to do but march on: they bombarded Nottingham at two o'clock the morning, and it is given up to them." At the command of the Captain they again doggedly put forward, but desertions became more frequent, and at Eastwood, a mile or two further on, report came that the Yeomanry were in the neighbourhood. That intelligence practically ended the matter. Brandreth's army instantly ceased to exist Directly afterwards fifteen Hussars came in sights and the magistrate who accompanied them testified that he saw &om a distance the rustic battalion "still formed," but when he arrived at the place he found only a few guns and pikes.

Such was the termination of the last English Rebellion.

The termination, did we say? No, alas! it was but the beginning. The cunning beaters had only just started the two-and-sixpenny hare: the field, with its hundred guinea steeds, and riders of priceless reputation and importance, had yet to steeplechase over miles of country, at much risk, ere the quarry could, by any code of sportsman's law, receive its despatch.

For some weeks following the memorable 9th of June, the military and constabulary were busily employed in pursuit of the fugitives. Many of them were captured in the immediate neighbourhood, but a few had gone farther afield and were more troublesome to find. In the meantime public opinion throughout the country was more than a little exercised over the matter. The policy of the Government and of the Government organs was to magnify the importance of the "revolt," and to gravely enlarge upon its potentialities. It had cost the party not a little to engineer this rebellion, and, poor though it might be, they were determined to make it serve its purpose as "an example." So the pikes and smock-frocks were overlooked, and the Pentrich and Wingfield clodhoppers given a noble run for their money. They were to be tried for treason "intended to deprive and depose our Lord the King of and from the style, honor and kingly name of the Imperial Crown of this Realm." The Opposition, of course, was loud in its ridicule of such a proceeding, denouncing it as


a piece of political bluster. A special commission of four of His Majesty's Judges was appointed to try the valiant besiegers of Butterly Ironworks, one of whom was Sir Charles Abbot (afterwards Lord Tenterden).

Thursday, September 25, was the opening day, and great were the preparations made at the county town of Derby. Besides javelin men, no fewer than two hundred burgesses were made special constables, and these, together with a body of Yeomanry and the principal gentry of the neighbourhood, formed a cavalcade which set forward, headed by the Sheriff, to meet the Judges' coach from London. Their lordships were escorted in solemn state to the County Hall, and subsequently adjourned to attend a sumptuous repast provided in honour of the occasion. Next morning the Court assembled for business. Twelve prisoners, brought from Nottingham under an escort of the isth Light Dragoons, were placed in the dock, with seven others (including Brandreth) who had been confined in Derby gaol. Their solicitors, in accordance with the usual formality, made application for counsel, and Mr. Cross and Mr. Denman were assigned for the defence. This business terminated the sitting.

On the evening of October 14— three weeks after the first brief meeting of the Court — the ancient capital of the Peak County again showed great and unmistakable signs of activity. The streets were thronged with a crowd variously composed of fine gentlemen, burly formers, and roughly-clad workers. All sorts and conditions of men were requisitioned to assist at the great inquiry. Lodgings were at a premium, and the coffee-rooms and inn parlours were full of folks eagerly occupied in discussing the one absorbing topic. "The town was crowded in an unprecedented manner," records a contemporary writer. The Commission, which reassembled the following day, had twenty-one prisoners to try, and no less than 300 jurymen had been summoned, together with 268 Crown witnesses. This was "stifling the plot" with a vengeance! But besides these supernumeraries there were the great officers of the law— the four Judges, the Attorney-General, the Solicitor-General, two eminent and learned Serjeants, and six barristers.

Early on Wednesday morning part of the prisoners were again brought over firom Nottingham, and a post-chaise accompanied them loaded with the pikes, guns, and other weapons of the rebels. In the afternoon the Judges attended divine service at All Saints Church, the Sheriff's chaplain preaching firom the appropriate text, Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil." The interior

«

of the County Hall, or Assize Court, had been entirely rearranged to meet the anticipated press for accommodation. The building was crowded with the ^lite who had flocked in from adjoining counties, and, in fact, from every part of the land. The Grand Jury was emparmelled from the leading county fiunilies, with Lord George Augustus Cavendish (brother of the Duke of Devonshire) as foreman. At 2.30 the proceedings began.

As already mentioned, the Government had compassed thdr intention of elevating this affair into national importance, and were likewise bent upon making it serve as an impressive warning. At the same time they prudently recollected that laughter lies very near to tears, and that the irreverent observations of some malcontent scribe might easily turn their tragedy into a screaming £uce even before the jury could be dismissed. Accordingly, an announcement was made by Chief Baron Richards prohibiting any report of the trials from being published until the whole should be terminated. The papers on both sides, however, disregarded this injunction to some extent, subjecting themselves to severe censure in consequence. But stringent as the precautions were to keep the trial up to a high sentimental level, it was impossible to ignore its glaring incongruity compared with some earlier State trials. With the trial of Lord William Russell, or the impeachment of Warren Hastings, for instance, it might have several things in common — the emmeiKre of the Judges, the eloquence of the speakers, and the brilliance of die onlookers. But what of the central figures around which the pageant moved? — the smock-frocked subverters of the empire!

Undeniably the game was poor, and the tale of the hunt is scarcely worth telling. The hearing lasted ten days, and the Attorney-General in his opening speech gave an able risumi of the law of treason, carrying the Court back to the reign of Edward HI., and then leading it forward over the intervening centuries. Brandreth was tried first, and the evidence against him was overwhelming: witness after witness proved his every movement from the Sunday till the Wednesday morning. There were but two witnesses called for the defence, and together they hardly uttered a score words; but what they testified was an unconscious sarcasm on the whole proceeding— one proved that the prisoner had been a pauper, the other spoke as to his previous good character. Mr. Denman (afterwards the celebrated Lord Justice), the junior counsel for the defence, caught the spirit of the thing as it appealed to an outsider. In the dock stood the Nottingham Captain, with ferocious visage and black stubby beard, and, pointing at him, counsel


quoted fix)in Lord Byron's "Corsair," then the poem of the

hour:—

But who that chief? his name on every shore Is fiuned and feared— they ask and know no more, With these he mingles not but to command — Few are his words, but keen his eye and hand.

And then, turning on the Court, he made the most obvious enquiry:—

Who was it that sent Brandreth from Nottingham to delude these unfortunate men, to inflame their understandings, and to lead them to acts of violence and outrage? There is something here concealed, there is something behind the curtain.

And subsequently, at the trial of Ludlam, he returned to the same argument:—

Why did not counsel for the Crown bring forward the evidence of the previous meetings? ... It was known the country was in a very distressed condition, and upon that condition wicked and artful men were but too likely to operate, with a view to produce disturbances. . . . But the principal author xA these disturbances was kept out of view. The unfortunate Captain, who was but himself an instrument, was brought forward, while his employer was invisible.

The prosecution had been careful not to introduce Oliver. It was feared that the advisers of the prisoners would endeavour to prove that one Crabtree, who had been in association with some of the rebels, was really Oliver \ so the real Simon Pure was brought to Derby while the trial was in progress, and privately shown to the witnesses as Mr. Crabtree, who all agreed that he was not the Mr. Crabtree they had met at Pentrich!

The verdict was easy to forecast All the prisoners were found guilty of high treason, and on Saturday, October 25, were placed in the dock for the last time. They had conducted themselves throughout the long hearing with indifference, and (with the exception of Brandreth, who was undoubtedly guilty of homicide) probably regarded their offence as a bad case of "drunk and disorderly." When severally asked if they had anything to say, Brandreth answered characteristically, "Let me address you in the words of Our Saviour, 'If it be possible let this cup pass from me, but not my will but your lordships' be done.'" Chief Baron Richards put on the black cap amid profound silence. It seemed incredible that such a witless band could be taken altogether seriously. Yet they were. Brandreth, the ambitious pauper, and Turner, Ludlam and George Weightman, his lieutenants, were severally sentenced to die the old savage death of traitors, to be "drawn on a hurdle to the place of execution, and be there severally hanged by the neck until you be dead; and that afterwards your heads shall be severed from your bodies and

your bodies, divided into four quarters, shall be disposed of as His Majesty shall direct ** As for the remainder, some were transported and others set at liberty.

• • • • •

November 7 was the date fixed for the carrying out of the sentences. In the meantime the extreme punishment of the law was commuted in Weightman's case to transportation for life, and the bulk of the public had hopes that the death penalty would not be inflicted upon at least two of the others.

Brandreth continued to maintain his cool demeanour, and all efforts to draw from him particulars of his past history failed. He seems, too, to have been regarded as a sort of outsider by his fellow unfortunates, who now frequently met together in the chapel and exercise ground. The poor wretches, old neighbours as they were, wept and condoled with one another, and seemed to lay the blame upon Bacon (who had escaped with transportation) for bringing them into this trouble. Bacon it will be remembered was the Pentrich man who had made Oliver's acquaintance in Yorkshire. The Nottingham Captain betrayed none of these weaknesses, and, but for the remark that "Oliver has brought me to this," which fell from his lips once or twice, he reproached nobody. His garment might be rough and his countenance ferocious, but in spite of all his crimes there was something remarkable about the man. He was a turbulent personality, whom Charles Kingsley, for instance, would have delighted to study. The day before his execution he wrote a letter to his wife, which we extract in full. It is written in a firm hand, and is a singularly simple and dignified epistle:—

My beloved Wife,— This is the morning before I suffer. I have sat down to write my last lines to you, hoping that my soul will shortly be at rest in Heaven, through the redeeming blood of Christ I feel no fear in passing through the shadow of death to eternal life, so I hope you will take the promise of God as I have to your own soul, as we may meet in Heaven, where every sorrow will cease, and all will be joy and peace. My beloved, I received a letter this morning, with a pound note in it, which I leave for you in the jailor's hands, with the other things which will be sent to you, as I shaU mention before I have done. This is the account of what I send you:— One work bag, two balls of worsted and one of cotton, and a handkerchief, an old pair of stockings and shirt, and the letter I received from my beloved sister, with the following sum of money, £1 1 21. *jd,: this I suppose will be sent in a packet to you by some means. My dearly beloved wife, this is the last correspondence I can have with you, so you will make yourself as easy as you possibly can, and I hope God will Uess you and comfort you as He hath me: and so my blessing attend you and the children, and the blessing of God be with you all now and evermore. Adieu! adieu to all for ever.— Your most affectionate husband, J. Brandreth.

Both Sheriff and Governor were not a little perplexed in their preparations for the execution: the task of beheading three men was not a pleasant one, and they endeavoured, though unsuccessfully, to get out of it. They, however, got the quartering remitted by royal warrant

At ten o'clock in the morning of the &teful day a detachment of the Enniskillen Dragoons was marched into the town to regulate the traffic, while a special force of police were requisitioned to keep back the crowd and check possible disturbance. A vast mob assembled outside the gaol, and, during a long wait, occupied themselves by inspecting the gibbets, blocks, axes, knives, and other gruesome paraphernalia. Inside the prison malefactors and officials were engaged in despatching the routine of the law: the Sheriff, in formal phrase, called on the gaoler to produce the bodies; the bodies were produced in solemn order; fetters were knocked off, and others with convenient locks, suitable for dead bodies, were fitted on instead; then came the hurdle, on which each of the wretches were dragged for a last ride round the yard; and finally the procession headed out into the free air and faced the crowd. The doomed men were hurried up the ladder. Turner calling out wildly, "This is all Oliver and the Government!" A few minutes after their stiff corpses were dangling from the gibbets.

The next process in this horrible public spectacle was the beheading. After the bodies had been left hanging for half an hour they were cut down and laid with their necks upon the block. The Clay Cross collier who had been employed to wield the axe faltered as he struck the first blow, and the six thousand spectators groaned and shuddered as an assistant stepped forward and finished the mutilation with a knife. The hangman then seized the head by its hair, and, marching round the scaffold, cried, "Behold the head of the traitor, Jeremiah Brandreth!" The same performance was repeated over the other bodies. The overwrought crowd hissed, hooted, and finally dispersed in a panic, it being rumoured the dragoons were riding down upon them. The mangled remains of the conspirators were put into coffins and buried in one grave in St Werburgh's Churchyard. The block is still preserved as a memento in the prison, and, though stored in a dry place, the blood is reputed to be still moist upon it: tradition asserts that it will always remain so. Among those who witnessed this, the last execution for treason, was the poet Shelley, who wrote an indignant protest against the conduct of the authorities.

JOHN HYDE.
