# Trial of Mellor, Thorpe and Smith

https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=umn.31951p00335898c&seq=7
https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Report_of_proceedings_under_commissions.html?id=iNxbAAAAQAAJ&redir_esc=y

pp35-73

Wednesday, 6th January 1813.

THE JURY were charged with the Prisoners in the usual form, upon an Indictment, which alleged that the Prisoner Mellor, on the 28th of April last, fired a pistol loaded with bullets, &c. at
William Horsfall, by which firing he received a mortal wound on the left side of the belly, of which wound he languished till the 30th of April and then died; and that the Prisoners Thorpe and Smith, were present aiding and abetting Mellor to commit the said Felony; and that so the three Prisoners wilfully murdered the said William Horsfall.

Thomas Smith.
The Indictment was opened by Mr. Richardson.

Mr. Park. May it please your Lordships; Gentlemen of the Jury, You are now empanelled, and have been sworn, to enquire into the matter of blood. I need not tell you, that the offence with which the prisoners stand charged, is the greatest crime that can be committed in society. In the investigation of such a subject as this, the Law, in conformity to the Law of God, makes no distinction as to the person, whose death is to be enquired into. The meanest subject of the realm is equally entitled to the protection of the Law as the highest; and therefore it is no matter of enquiry, who or what the person was, whose death is the subject of that enquiry. The matter for you to investigate is, whether he came by his death by violent means; whether he came by his death from the malice aforethought, expressed or implied, of any individuals, and whether any, or all, of the individuals, whom you have now in charge, were guilty of that offence. That is the subject-matter of your enquiry. But in a case of this sort, which is of so much importance to the country, it is absolutely necessary, that in detailing the facts, I should state to you the situation in which the deceased stood, and how he probably came to be the object of the attack of some persons. Whether of the individuals now before you, it will be your anxious duty to enquire, and to decide by your verdict.

Gentlemen, Mr. Horsfall is represented to me to have been a man rather turned of forty years of age; he was a married man, had a family of children, and was in very considerable business, in the West Riding of this county, as a manufacturer. I had occasion to mention to some of you, yesterday, and it is a matter of general notoriety to you all, that, for a considerable period of time, dreadful disturbances have existed in this county; but they had not existed in this county, that I am aware of, at least not in any considerable degree, till the two learned Judges, who are now sitting here, had returned to their homes from Lancaster, at the Spring Assizes of last year. But it is perfectly well known, it is a part of the History of our Country, that at the Spring Assizes of that year for Nottingham, a great number of persons had been tried for breaking the stocking frames, and other machinery, connected with the manufactures of that county. About that period a similar disposition manifested itself about Huddersfield, and other places in that part of this county, to commit outrages upon manufactories. And about the 11th of April, a very violent attack was made upon the mill of a Mr, Cartwright, which will be material in respect of the evidence that will be laid before you to-day. It afterwards appeared, and will be proved to you, that in meetings, where the three prisoners, now before you, were assembled, there was great abuse thrown out upon the master manufacturers, in their presence, and by them, particularly upon Mr. Cartwright and the deceased.

Mr. Horsfall is represented to me to have been a man, who had upwards of four hundred persons at work under him, extremely beloved by his men, and they greatly attached to him. He had very large manufactories, of course, from the employment of so many men; and he employed the machinery which was the object of the abuse of these misguided people. I have not the means of making such observations as I have frequently and lately heard made, upon the delusion which bas prevailed upon that subject, amongst the lower orders. It has been supposed that the increase of the machinery, by which manufactures are rendered more easy, abridges the quantity of labour wanted in the country. It is a fallacious argument: it is an argument, that no man, who understands the subject at all, will seriously maintain. I mention this, not so much for the sake of you, or of these unfortunate prisoners, as for the sake of the vast number of persons who are assembled in this place.

I hope that my learned Friend on the other side, will give me credit, that I mean to state no facts as bearing upon the prisoners at the bar, that I shall not, as I conceive, bring home to them. But I cannot help making general observations upon the subject, tod raw their Lordships' attention, and yours, to the case itself. I would rather, for perspicuity's sake, go to the facts which constitute the crime, and then apply it to the prisoners. Mr. Horsfall was a man, I understand, of warm feelings, of great and good understanding, and who saw the fallacy of these arguments; and he, perhaps imprudently(though I do not think so, for I do not think any man acts imprudently, in stating his sentiments on a subject which has been under his full consideration) he, I say, stated he would support this species of machinery, because he was sure it was advantageous to the country. He was perfectly wellknown, in consequence of the part he had taken in reference to these disturbances; and it was proposed by some persons, that he should be taken off.

It was perfectly known, that Huddersfield Market was one he was in the habit of attending, and which was held on Tuesdays.

He  went to that market, and returned between five and six in the afternoon of the 28th of April, at which period of the year we are considerably past the Equinox, and it will be proved, if necessary, though your own understandings would remind you of it, the Sun does not set till about a quarter or twenty minutes after seven; the consequence of which was, it was perfectly light. This gentleman was riding from Huddersfield Market on horseback, towards his own house, which was at Marsden, (I believe about seven miles). He had rode as far as from Huddersfield up to a house called the Warren House, which is a public house, kept by a man of the name of Armitage, who will be called before you. He at that house stopped to get some refreshment, still continuing on horseback. He drank a glass of rum and water, and seeing there two persons whom he knew, he gave to each a glass of gin and water, paid for it, and rode on as far as the corner of a plantation, two or three hundred yards from the Warren House, belonging to Mr. Radcliffe the magistrate. This plantation on the back of it opens into a field, then there is a second field lower down towards the South, a third field towards the South, then the road from Huddersfield to Crossland crosses, then there is away into Dungeon Wood, then there is a house belonging to Joseph Mellor, a cousin of the prisoner George Mellor, and a road to Holmfirth, past Armitage Bridge. At the corner of this plantation, this unfortunate gentleman, Mr. Horsfall, was shot. He immediately fell upon the neck of his horse, called out "Murder," and soon after fell to the ground. There was a person of the name of Parr, who will be called to you, riding a little way behind, who did not know Mr. Horsfall, and Mr. Horsfall did not know him; but immediately on hearing the report of the pistols, and seeing him fall, Parr rode up, and heard him call out "Murder." "Sir," says Mr. Horsfal, "you are a stranger to me, and I to you, but pray ride on to Mr. Horsfall's house, and get assistance," mean ing the house of his brother. Mr. Parr said, "Are you Mr. Horsfall of Marsden?" he said, "I am." Upon which Parr rode back to get assistance, and a person of the name of Bannister rode up and supported Mr. Horsfall in his armes, till a cart came up, in which he was carried back to the Warren House, where he languished thirty-eight hours, and then died. This is the body of the crime.

Now, Gentlemen, I would here make one observation in point of law, upon the indictment which has been stated to you. My learned Friend stated only one pistol as having been fired, and that was all that it was necessary to state in the indictment. I believe the fact to be, that out of four persons that were in company, two fired; that is immaterial. It was quite sufficient to state one, and no matter by which it was fired. Though the indictment states the pistol to be fired by George Mellor, if it was fired by either of the other prisoners it would be the same. I state this, because it is better you should have your minds not wavering on points of no significance in law.

This clearly is murder in some persons. There was no prior conversation, there was no previous malice between Mr. Horsfall and any of these persons; and therefore murder- it must be in those who gave the mortal wound. The question is, Is it murder in all or any of the prisoners at the bar? Now I proceed to state to you the way in which I shall establish that. It will be asked, How many persons were concerned in this murder? I state, four; and I state it upon the evidence of the witness Parr, who saw the fire (whether of one, or more, I will not say) but he saw a fire coming from that plantation; he heard a report, and he saw four men.

I go no further upon that part of the evidence, till I state, to you that I shall call one of the accomplices. To some of you, who were in that box yesterday, the law respecting accomplices was fully stated by one of their Lordships, who was so good as to confirm what I had humbly presumed to state in the outset upon that subject. I make no further observations upon that, because, though I believe the other learned Judge will take the trouble of summing up this case to you, I have no doubt the law will be stated in the same manner.

The witness I have to present to you, I state in the outset, and would therefore save my learned Friend the trouble of calling witnesses to prove, that an accomplice in burglary, or in the more heinous crime of murder, is a wicked man. I will suppose him to be as wicked as any of the prisoners at the bar, supposing them to be guilty; but then the question is (as his Lordship told the Jury in your place yesterday) Is his evidence so connected, so well digested, that it brings credit with the manner of telling it? and is he confirmed in some of those circumstances, which it is impossible to confirm him in, if he has not been speaking the truth? And it need not be a confirmation of him in all the circumstances, for if we could prove all the facts without him, we should then leave him to take that fate which his offence deserved, instead of making him a witness. Therefore, leaving that matter of accomplices here, I shall call this accomplice, whose name is Benjamin Walker, and he will tell you that there was a great deal of conversation about machinery among the cloth-dressers, on many days, particularly after the firing at Mr. Cartwright's mill, where there were some persons killed; that this raised a great indignation against the masters, in the shop of John Wood, where this accomplice worked with Mellor and Smith. The prisoner Thorpe worked at the shop of a person of the name of Fisher, very near to Wood's shop, near Longroyd Bridge. It seems, unfortunately, it was the constant habit (as will be proved to you in this case) to read accounts, amongst all the workmen, of what had been doing at Nottingham. And this business of the mill created such desperation among them, that Mellor (who appears, from the evidence I have to lay before you, to have been the ringleader in this business) declared in the shop, that he was determined to have Mr. Horsfall taken off. This I shall prove to you, by witnesses, to have passed before the fact; and I shall prove it, to confirm the accomplice. The accomplice knew nothing of his particular intentions as to the period of time, till the very day it happened; and he will tell you, that in the afternoon of that day, at that period which is called their drinking time, about four o'clock, Mellor called him into the room where he was (they not working in the same room) and there he disclosed what he was about to do that afternoon, that they were determined to waylay Mr. Horsfall in coming from Huddersfield market, and assassinate him; and that he must be one of the party. Walker will tell you, that this proposal took him by surprise; that at first he refused to have any thing to do with it, and that he was so discomposed at it, that he did not go to his drink, but returned to his work; he will tell you, that Mellor afterwards came to him, and called him into his room, and there he found Mellor with a bottle-green top coat on, which will be a most material fact in this case; that on his going with him into his shop, he gave to the witness a large pistol with a fluted barrel, loaded almost up to the top; and Mellor himself had a larger pistol with him.

Gentlemen, this pistol which Mellor had with him, will produce conviction as against that man, young as he seems to be, and melancholy as it is to see so young a man so desperate a character. It seems he had been in Russia, and brought home with him this pistol, which is of a peculiarly large size, with a brass mounting. That pistol he had either sold or given to a man, on some transaction respecting pigeons; but a person of the name of Hall, who was intimate with Mellor, and who will be called to you as a witness to-day, and whom Ido not state to be an entirely innocent man, for he knew these facts beforehand (but you must take men as they are, and as the circumstances of the country place them) he had bought this pistol, and had it in his possession, and will prove to you that Mellor came that afternoon and borrowed this pistol o him, and loaded it at Hall's house, at a place called the Yews, which is half way between Wood's shop and Dungeon Wood; he loaded it extremely high; he put in a double charge of treble powder; he put in one ball of the same kind which will be produced to you; he then beat another, or two, rather flat, and cut them into slugs, and put them as well as another ball in, and rammed them all down. You will find this charge was so great, that when he committed the fact, his finger was shattered by it, and that will be another material circumstance in this case. The witness said to him, "I hope you are not going to fire that?" to which Mellor said, "Yes,I mean to do for Horsfall with it; will you go with me?"

Hall refused to go, and Mellor took the pistol out with him under his great coat, saying it should be done. So far we go at present, with respect to Mellor.

The prisoner Thorpe was seen by this same witness to load along horse pistol, at Wood's shop, with balls and slugs, in the presence of Mellor. They both of them said it was to shoot Horsfall. He was again asked by some of the prisoners to join, but he refused, and then Smith or Walker swore that he would go. This man's previous knowledge I have no difficulty in saying, he ought to have communicated, if he believed it; and the only possible reason why a man should not have disclosed so heinous a transaction, ought to be, that he did not believe they would do it. But these declarations prove the state of the country, that they had no difficulty in making these communications, which other men never would make, if they were wicked enough to meditate the crime, and which hardly any of these men would have made under any other circumstances than those before him.

Gentlemen, it will be proved to you further by the accomplice Walker (and I only stepped out of the way to shew how he was confirmed) that he really objected to going; but he was told, "As I have told you I mean to execute this to-night, and you now know the secret, if you do not go I will shoot you." And the man says, that he went accordingly. Smith and he were told to go together, and they went up the roadway to the corner of the plantation. Mellor told them where togo, and Smith said, "I know where to go." As they went along the road, the accomplice said to Smith, "We really had better not meddle with such a thing as this." "Why," says he, "we had better go there, because if we go back they will suppose we have told, and we shall be shot;" (I state this in favour of Smith)" but we will endeavour to persuade them not todo it." And they went on. The other two men did not ge up the road, but went across a place called Dry Clough-close, and up that way to the corner of the plantation. Thorpe and Mellor were at the point of the plantation nearest to the road.

On their arrival, Smith went to them, as he told the accomplice, in order to reason with them against the doing this act; but he shortly came back and said, "I have not been able to prevail, weare to stand at a little distance from them, and we are to fire our pistols if theirs should miss, and they are to whistle or to give notice when Mr. Horsfall comes." A stone thad been removed out of the wall, to command the road; and soon after it was called out that Mr. Horsfall was coming, Mellor and Thorpe fired. As soon as they had fired, they retired into the back part of the wood towards the other two men, and told them they were afraid, or used some expression to denote timidity or effeminacy, of conduct: "You should have fired at all events." Thorpe gave his pistol to the accomplice. Whether he meant that he should carry it off, and himself, be relieved of it, I know not, but he put it into his hand.

The pan was then open, and the lock down, shewing it had been fired. You will find the materiality of this. On the way, Walker threw it down, and said he would have nothing to do with it, and Thorpe took it up and proceeded to Dungeon Wood; and then Mellor said, We must separate." And accordingly Mellor and Thorpe proceeded westward across a footpath by the Yews up to Wood's shop: and that very night Mellor shewed himself in Huddersfield, for a very good reason probably; I do not know that it may be attempted in this case, but it often is in cases of this sort, that it might be proved he was elsewhere at the time. But the circumstances I have presently to detail to you, will leave no particle of doubt in your minds; and if it should be so that no doubt is left in these cases, it is a great consolation to those who have to administer the justice of the country. That he was seen at Huddersfield at some period that evening, I give then as a fact; but the distances are so inconsiderable, that the whole circuit, beginning and ending at Wood's shop, might be performed in about one hour and ten minutes. The accomplice's story is, that he parted with Mellor and Thorpe in Dungeon Wood, and that he and Smith went on to Honley.
८८
Here for the present I leave them; and supposing nothing further takes place, how shall I confirm the accomplice as to these facts? I shall confirm him as to there being four men by Parr, in the way I have stated. I shall confirm him as to the retreat of four men, for I have no less than three or four different persons, who at different parts of the route saw four men running in the direction to Dungeon Wood, and getting over the wall into Dungeon Wood, and looking behind them for the purpose of discovering whether any body was within sight. And I shall prove this fact, which is decisive, that one of the witnesses, who has no more concern with this transaction, than any of you, saw in their getting over the wall a brazen-mounted pistol from under the coat of one of them. It had discovered itself. He said, "There go Luds, and we shall have mischief to-night," not knowing what had passed with respect to Mr. Horsfall. Whether the prisoner heard this I do not know, but he looked down, and put the flap of his coat over the pistol. I do not know whether the witnesses will state that they knew the particular persons, but I shall prove these facts applying to four persons.

There is another circumstance I shall prove to you by the accomplice; that two of them had top coats of a dark colour, and the other two had common coats of a dark colour. I shall prove to you by Parr, that all the men had dark-coloured clothes.

The accomplice will swear, that he and Smith had short coats; and to show that Thorpe and Mellor had the two top coats, I shall prove their going, after the murder, to the house of Joseph Mellor, the cousin of George Mellor, which is at the bottom of Dungeon Wood; I shall prove their depositing these top coats there, that they might go without them. I shall prove, what is decisive of this case, their depositing the two pistols there; the Russian pistol and the other. I shall call to you one of the apprentices of Joseph Mellor (the other has escaped, and does not answer his recognizance; but he shall be called upon it.) I shall call the apprentice, with whom Thorpe went up stairs into one of their rooms, and hid these two pistols; and told him to give those pistols to his master, when he came home. I shall prove that they were afterwards shewn to another apprentice. And I shall call the master, who at the time was at Huddersfield market, who 'will tell you he went up with his apprentice to that room, and the pistols, were shewn to him; and that afterwards, hearing that soldiers were about making enquiries, they took them from that place, and deposited them in the barn, and hid them there. I shall prove that one of those pistols, so deposited by Mellor in the house of his cousin Joseph, was the very pistol he had borrowed of Hall that afternoon; and I shall prove, moreover, that though Hall saw him load it, when he deposited it in Joseph Mellor's house it was unloaded.

There is another circumstance most material. It will be sworn by the accomplice, that Thorpe complained, in the plantation, of having wounded his cheek: and Mellor complained of having wounded his finger; by the recoil of the pistol, I suppose I will prove, that Mellor declared, the next day, to another man, who was not of the party, that he had hurt his finger, by having over-loaded the pistol. Then as to Thorpe hurting his face; I will prove that George Mellor, who went with him to Joseph Mellor's, desired water for his friend to wash his cheek; and he accordingly got it. Gentlemen, are not these circumstances extremely strong to corroborate an accomplice? How is it in the ordinary chain of human events, that you can get such evidence? I have for one always thought, before I dreamt I should have any concern in such an unfortunate business as this, and shall to my dying day think, that circumstantial evidence of this description has ten, times the weight to satisfy the mind of a jury, of the positive declaration of a witness. For an individual may be wicked enough to swear to facts that do not exist; but a strong, well-connected chain of circumstances, will not hang together without being true; there would be such dreadful breaks in the chain, if they were not true, as would expose the fallacy in a moment. But, give me leave to say (for that is often misunderstood by gentlemen in your situation) subject of course to be set right by their Lordships, that you are not to suppose that,
because A. B. C. and D. who are witnesses in the cause, and have seen the same transaction, do not give exactly the same account as each other in words; therefore it is not true.

Every slight discrepancy of the evidence in that respect, gives it confirmation. Such is the imperfection of human sight, that you and I perhaps, who mean to speak perfectly truly, may differ in some of the circumstances. But you are to look at the great mass of facts, and see whether the witnesses do not confirm each other.

I do not know whether I mentioned, that George Mellor borrowed of the wife of his cousin, Joseph Mellor, a handkerchief, to bind up the hand of himself, or the face of his companion; and stated, that he wanted work for this companion.

They asked the woman, when Joseph Mellor would come home; the answer was, "He seldom comes home much before ten, he is at Huddersfield." They proceeded to the Yews, and afterwards on to Huddersfield.

I have stated to you, that Mellor and Thorpe parted from the accomplice and Smith in Dungeon Wood. The accomplice will tell you, that they went down to Honley, and did not return till ten at night. At Honley they stopped at a public house, kept by one Robinson. So says the accomplice. Is that true? I shall call the accomplice, and the wife of the publican. The accomplice says, they had several pints of beer.

I shall prove by the wife, that two young men (for so, unfortunately, they are, neither of them being, I believe, above twenty-three) were at her house, and drank several pints of beer. I do not know that she will prove that she knows them now.

You will naturally ask, What made them take any observation of these young men?—There was a drunken collier in the house; so drunk, that he does not himself know any thing that passed.

A person came in, and stated that he had, in coming from Huddersfield market, heard of the death of Mr. Horsfall; and Smith immediately began whistling, being a fine whistler, which drew attention to him; and he whistled so well, that this drunken collier got up to dance. And this is the circumstance that has brought it to the recollection of the publican and his wife; and they stated, that one of the young men whistled famously, not having the least idea that the accomplice had given this evidence, and mentioned that circumstance.

But I have not done with the case yet. I ought to tell you another reason why disclosure was so easily made to Hall, who was not an accomplice. Hall was a bed-fellow of the prisoner Mellor, and Mellor told him that night, or immediately after, that he had committed this murder, and that Thorpe and he had left their two pistols at Joseph Mellor's, at Dungeon, amongst some flocks, and had left word with the apprentices, that they must be given to their master when he came home; and then he said, "Thorpe and I went through Lockwood, and so to Huddersfield, and there we parted." These men being so intimately connected as to be bed-fellows, the wonder (even independently of other circumstances) was the less, that a communication should be made so freely. Smith was not a bedfellow of theirs, but he slept in the same room. I stated to you, that he and the accomplice had gone to Honley, having buried their pistols, which were loaded, in some ant-hills.

Hallwisfdll states, that it was late when Smith came home; and I ought to have told you, that it will not rest, as to declarations, upon the evidence of Hall or of the accomplice only, but en the testimony of a person of the name of Sowden, whose evidence I will not go through.

The next day (though enquiries could not at that time be made to the full, and, as you are perhaps aware, were not made with any effect till the month of October last) it occurred to these men, that as enquiry necessarily would be made, there should be some more secrecy observed; and accordingly you will find, that Thorpe afterwards insisted upon the accomplice Walker swearing, in the way they have done in too many instances, never to reveal the fact. He pulled out a Bible, and administered the oath, which he had prepared. It was administered first to one of the witnesses, to whom I before alluded, of the name of Sowden, in consequence of their having acquainted hint with their intentions the day before; and you will find Mellor was present at this. Thorpe afterwards brought in Smith, and Benjamin Walker the accomplice, John Walker his father (who was a workman in the same shop, and whom he supposed to have heard the fact from his son; but the father, I believe, will tell you, that the first he heard of it was from Mellor himself,) William Hall, and another person.

Thorpe said to Sowden, "You must administer the oath to all these, or I will shoot you." He complied, through fear of his life; and they all took it, except John Walker, who refused to take it, saying, he had never taken an oath in his life, and would not do it; and they said, "If you make any declaration about this, we will shoot you, or whoever it may be." The witness sometime afterwards met him in a field, when he said, "I am afraid it has been blown about that I have had a concern in the murder of Mr. Horsfall, and it is time I should be off to America." I shall prove also his declaration about going to America by another person. And he said to the witness, if he heard of his repeating it, he would shoot him; but the witness told him he had not.

Thus, Gentlemen, do not I confirm the accomplice by such a variety of witnesses, that I feel almost ashamed of going through the statement; though I ought not to be ashamed of, fully stating a case so materially affecting the prisoners. But It appears to me nothing can be clearer than this mass of evidence I have to lay before you. I am not aware that I have omitted to state to you any fact that is material. I have not gone through the detail of the facts, for that would fatigue you.

One cannot but most feelingly lament, that young men, no older than these, should be charged with a crime of so deep and heinous a dye, as that which you are sworn to try; and therefore (as I said in the outset) you have a most important duty to discharge between God and your own souls. If these young men have not committed the murder, for God's sake let them go free; but if you see the finger of Providence pointing at them in as satisfactory a manner as if you had with your bodily senses seen the crime committed, however painful the duty, it is your duty to pronounce them guilty; and guilt must be followed by punishment. For the Law of God itself has declared, "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed." And it is said by the same authority, that the land can only be cleansed from the pollution it has received. from blood, by the blood of him that sheddeth it.

THE EVIDENCE, having been gone through, was summed up by
Mr. Justice LE BLANC.

Gentlemen of the Jury,

THIS, which has so long engaged your attention, is a charge Mr. Justice brought against the prisoners at the bar, George Mellor, William Thorpe, and Thomas Smith, of the wilful murder of William Summing Horsfall. It is not necessary particularly to call your attention up.

to the manner in which the charge is made. The indictment charges that they or one of them, and it is perfectly immaterial which, or whether one or two of them actually fired the pistol, or whatever piece it was that was fired; but that one or other of them, firing a piece at Mr. Horsfall, inflicted the wound Le Blanc's which occasioned his death, and that the rest were there. It charges them all as principals in the murder; and there is no doubt in point of law, that if all or any of the prisoners at the bar went out with a formed design, known to all of them, to waylay William Horsfall, for the purpose that either all or any of them (as should be most convenient) should take an opportunity of firing at him and wounding or killing him, and in consequence of that a shot was fired by any of them which produced his death, it is murder in all of them. There is as little doubt in the present case, that the person, respecting whose death we are enquiring, has been murdered; because there is no circumstance which has appeared in the case, which in point of law can make this otherwise than a murder of the foulest description. No question therefore will arise on the nature of the offence; and the only question you will have to attend to is, whether or not the evidence which has been laid before you, and which I will detail to you as well as I am able, shall or shall not satisfy you that the three prisoners charged with this offence, or any of them, are the persons who were so concerned in waylaying him and firing the fatal shot.

It will be only necessary just to advert to the time, as mentioned by the person who proved the fact. It appears that Mr. Horsfall had gone to Huddersfield on the 28th of April in the course of the forenoon, and had attended Huddersfield market in the course of his business. It appears that he was in the habit of going there; so that it was perfectly known that his course of proceeding was to attend the market, and to go home again afterwards to his house at Marsden, at the distance of about six or seven miles from Huddersfield. It was in proof, by a person of the name of Armitage, who kept a public house at Crossland Moor, called the Warren House, that he had seen Mr. Horsfall go to Huddersfield market in the morning; that he seldom missed going on a market day; that he had called at his house on his return back, and he says as far as he can fix the hour (speaking at this distance of time not very particularly, and no one can speak particularly as to time, unless his attention was called to it) it was a quarter before six in the evening that he stopped at his door, the Warren House, on his wayback, being then on horseback. He says that he drank a glass of rum and water at the door, and that there were two men of the name of Sykes, who were workmen and had been employed under him, whom he treated with a glass of liquor each, and he went away, never having got off his horse, but having stayed at the door about twenty minutes. So that according to his account, it was a few minutes after six clock when he left the Warren House, to proceed on to his use at Marsden. Then he says Mr. Horsfall rode home wards. He describes the plantation of Mr. Radcliffe, as being by the road side as he proceeded along. According to the map Le Blanc's it is on the left-hand side of the road as Mr. Horsfall was going homewards. That plantation, he says, is something better than a quarter of a mile from the Warren House. So that according to his account of the time (supposing him to have stopped there about a quarter before six, and to have stayed twenty minutes, and to have set out five minutes after six) he would have had to go a quarter of a mile before he came to the plantation where this circumstance happened; which would bring it to a short time probably after six o'clock. He says that at nearly half past six o'clock that evening, as nearly as he can recollect, some children brought the account to his house, that Mr. Horsfall had been shot. That tallies very much with the account he had before given of the time Mr. Horsfall had been at his door, and the period which must have elapsed before this unfortunate accident happened. He says that he and the two men of the name of Sykes, who had been just before treated with some liquor by Mr. Horsfall, set out immediately, and so soon that they had not finished the liquor Mr. Horsfall had ordered for them; that they found him sitting by the road side about thirty yards below the plantation, and rather nearer to his house than the plantation was. It appears that a person, who had been upon the road at the moment, had assisted in keeping him upon his horse for a time. He says Joseph Bannister was at that time with him; that he found Mr. Horsfall bleeding very much; that they got him down to his (the witness's) house as speedily as ever they could, and he died the next day but one. He is particularly asked as to the time, and fixes it at that hour, as nearly as he can recollect it. He says that many people come into his house, and he is frequently looking at the clock to see when their horses are to be ready; and that he is sure it was nearly half past six, when the news came that Horsfall had been shot, because a person went to look at the clock at that time. So that according to what he says, it must have been between ten minutes or a quarter after six and half after six, that this act (whoever did it) must have been done at the plantation.

The next witness is a person of the name of Parr, who gives this account: He was going home from, Huddersfield on the same road that Mr. Horsfall was going; he passed this inn, where Mr. Horsfall had stopped, and before he got to the plantation he heard avery large crack, like the report of a gun or a pistol, and it seemed to him to come out of Mr. Radcliffe's plantation, out of that nook nearest to the public house where Mr. Horsfall had stopped; that he saw the smoke arising from the spot where the gun had been fired, and he saw four persons in that corner of the plantation. He says that he was himself

at the distance of about one hundred and fifty yards from the Le Blanc's plantation, going along the road, at the time he heard this noise and saw the smoke, and saw the persons who were in the plantation; so that he was in a different situation from the person who was just abreast of the plantation in the road. So far things would have a different appearance, and persons might be visible in a wood or plantation from one point, who might not from another. He says that all the four persons, he so saw in the plantation, had dark-coloured clothes on; that at that time there was a person riding along up the road before him (that is, going the same way that he was riding); that after the report of this gun or pistol, that person's horse turned round as quick as possible, and the man immediately fell with his face upon the horse's neck; he raised himself up by the mane, and called out "Murder." As soon as he had called out murder, there was one of the four men got on the wall with one hand and both feet; he called out to this man, and said "What, are not you contented yet?" and immediately put his horse into a gallop, to ride up to the spot as fast as he could; and the four men ran out at the side of the plantation farthest from the road, that is, going the other way; he himself rode up to Mr. Horsfall, and perceived that the blood had just flowed on his breeches; he was sitting on horseback when he rode up to him; he said, "Good man, you are a stranger to me; I am shot;" and he seemed to fall sick, and was going to fall off his horse; upon which the witness held him upon his horse, and the horse went on a foot pace; and while he was holding him upon his horse, the blood spouted out upon his side; he then desired him to go to Mr. Horsfall, a relation of his near that place, and immediately he fell off his horse; that he put him straight at the side of the road; and that there were two boys, sons of Abraham Willey, a witness afterwards called before you, who were gathering horse-dung upon the road, and that he called them, and left them with this gentleman who had been so shot, and gallopped towards the other Mr. Horsfall's, in order to inform him of what had happened. He describes this plantation as being narrow, not more than thirty yards over. He is sure he saw four men; that they were all strangers to him, he did not know them; he saw them walking about in the plantation, before he heard the crack of the gun or pistol, before he got up; and he says, that when Mr. Horsfall seemed to get up abreast of the plantation, that he observed one of the men stoop under the boughs of the trees, and then he saw the smoke and heard the firing, and that the other three seemed to be standing behind. That is the account given by this Mr. Parr.

Mr. Joseph Bannister, a clothier, states, that he was upon the road on the same evening, the 28th of April, and he fixes it at nearly half-past six, when he met Parr, who had assisted Mr. Horsfall, and had left him in the care of the two boys, gallopping upon the road. This tallies with the account which Armitage Le Blanc's had given, that this happened by a quarter past six or thereabouts. He states, that immediately on being informed by Parr of what had happened, he galloped up, and found Mr. Horsfall lying by the side of the road, very bloody; and that he was removed from thence to the Warren House, and he remained with him there some time.

At the Warren House he was visited by Mr. Houghton, a surgeon, who tells you, that he was informed he was sent for about seven o'clock, and that another professional gentleman had got to Mr. Horsfall before he reached him, he did not get to Warren House till between eight and nine in the evening, when he found Horsfall lying on the bed; that he appeared sick and pale, and his pulse was so much exhausted, that it was scarcely to be felt; it was a weak tremulous pulse; he examined him, and found two wounds on the upper part of the left thigh, three inches asunder; there was another wound, on the lower part of the belly, on the left side; two more on the right thigh, and a slight bruise on the lower part of the belly.

He says, one of the balls had been extracted before he came, and he extracted another large ball from the inside of the right thigh, near to the hip-joint; that he thought very unfavourably of him, and particularly as that one ball he describes as having entered on the left side (the plantation being on Mr. Horsfall's left hand) had penetrated from the left side to the right side, and had nearly penetrated the femoral artery, and that he had no well-founded hope of his recovery from the beginning. In fact, this Gentleman died the following day, and there is no doubt but that this wound, which the surgeon points out, which had penetrated from the left side to the right, was the cause of his death. And the two bullets were produced, one being a pretty large bullet, almost the size of a musket bullet, and one which appeared to have been cut and flattened. One of these was extracted by Mr. Houghton, and another by a gentleman who was there before him : they were produced by two relations of Mr. Horsfall, with whom they were deposited after they were extracted. That is, the evidence with respect to the cause of the death; and to be sure there cannot be a doubt that this person being so shot at, as he was proceeding on the King's highway, it was wilful murder, unless it can be shewn by some circumstances, that it was merely accidental.

Then they call witnesses, for the purpose of shewing who these four persons were, that were seen in this plantation by Mr. Parr, who was following at some little distance after Mr. Horsfall, and who actually saw the fact committed, hearing the crack, seeing the smoke, and seeing the men run away out Le Blanc's of the back part of the plantation after the deed was committed.

Summing They call first Benjamin Walker, a person who himself professes up. to have been one of these four men; and you are to attend to the account that he gives. I need not state to you that a man who is produced, admitting himself to have been one of the four men who lay in wait armed for the purpose of shooting another, and who had gone out because he was asked so to do, was himself an accomplice in the deed that was done; and that therefore he does not stand in the situation of a witness, to whom full and perfect credit is to be given, So far his testimony is to be received, as the account given by himself, and the corroboration given to it by other witnesses that shall be produced, may satisfy you that the account he gives is true.

Benjamin Walker says he himself is a cropper, and that he worked as a cropper at the manufactory of Mr. Wood, at Longroyd Bridge, which is between Huddersfield and the place where this transaction happened; that he had worked there nearly two years; that it is a distance of only a quarter of a mile from Huddersfield; that Mellor and Smith worked at this same manufactory of Mr. Wood; that since April, Smith left that service, where he was an apprentice; that the other prisoner Thorpe worked at the manufactory of a Mr. Fisher, in the same business of a cropper as he himself worked, and that Fisher's manufactory and Wood's are not more than two or three hundred yards distant from each other, both very near Longroyd Bridge; that he was not so well acquainted with Thorpe as with the other prisoners. He states (alluding to what has been heard perhaps in the county, but is not the subject of the present enquiry) that an attack had been made by a very mischievous description of people, on some manufactories or mills belonging to a Mr. Cartwright, some short time before; that on that attack on Mr. Cartwright's mills and premises, the assailants had met with a proper resistance, and in that resistance some of them had been wounded and killed; that they were talking, in this manufactory of Wood's, about what had happened at the attack on Cartwright's, and that they had said it was a hard matter that these men, who had attacked the property of others, had had the misfortune to be killed themselves, or wounded in the attack; that upon that occasion George Mellor said that there was no method of smashing the machinery, but by shooting the masters; that they had lost two men in this attack on Cartwright's. He further states, that the day Mr. Horsfall was shot, he was at work at Wood's; that George Mellor and Smith worked together in one room, and he (Benjamin Walker) worked in another; and that on that day, between four and five in the afternoon, George Mellor, the prisoner, came to him into the shop where he was at work, and he describes William Hall, and his father Mr. Justice (John Walker) and his brother (William Walker) as being in the Le Blanc's shop at the time. He says that Mellor asked him to go with Summing him to shoot Mr. Horsfall; that he did not consent at the time, and Mellor went away, and he himself went away to his drink.

This was between four and five o'clock . He was absent about half an hour, and came back, That would bring it to about five o'clock. When he came back, he found George Mellor in the shop; one Varley was there, and Hall, and his father; and then Mellor came again, and gave him a pistol into his hand loaded, and said that he must go with him to shoot Mr. Horsfall, and told him it was loaded with double ball. He lifted up the panto see whether it was primed, and found that it was loaded nearly to the top, and primed. To be sure, Gentlemen, it is an extraordinary thing to those who have not been in the habit of hearing such occurrences, that any men in this world should hold such converse so openly together; but this is the account given.

Upon which this man (Walker) says, he said he would go with Mellor, and an order was given to go to Mr. Radcliffe's plantation, and he thinks that both the prisoners Smith and Thorpe were present; and Mellor directed Smith to go with this witness to the plantation. He says, that at the time the prisoner Mellor came into the shop to him, Mellor had on a drab jacket, but afterwards when he joined him in the plantation (for he did not see him till he joined him in the plantation, he and Smith being ordered to go to the plantation and wait there for him) Mellor had on a bottle-green top coat (and it becomes material, in considering the circumstances given in evidence in confirmation, to attend to the dress of the prisoner;) and that the other prisoner Thorpe had on a dark-coloured top coat.

He says that Smith and himself, who had been ordered to go first up to the plantation, had each of them a dark green coat on, but no top coats. He says Smith and he got up to the plantation first, and that they went there by the high road most part of the way, but part of the way they went through the fields, and then they got into the plantation; that the prisoner Smith had a pistol with him; Smith told him it was a pistol which he (Smith) had bought of one Mills, and that it was without a cock when he bought it, but that he had since put a cock to it; that when he saw it, it was loaded, as Smith told him. This man himself had a pistol, which Mellor had put into his hand, and put into his hand, as he says, ready loaded.

He says, that when Mellor and Thorpe got to the plantation, he and Smith had been there about ten minutes. Mellor and Thorpe came over the fields, he thinks not the same way that he and Smith had gone. He says, that he had had some conversation with Smith, as he went along, in which he expressed to Smith that he did not quite like the business they were going on, and that he was not for going any further. However, Smith said, "Let us go forward, and then let us counsel Le Blanc's the others to go back again; it is a pity to go." However, he says that Smith afterwards went up to the other two, when they were in the plantation, that is, to George Mellor and Thorpe, but that he (Benjamin Walker) did not go up with Smith, that they were at the distance of twenty yards, and when Smith came back, he told him that Mellor had said, that if they offered to leave him, he would shoot them dead. He fixes the distance, at which he says Mellor and Thorpe were from him in the plantation at that time, at about twenty yards.

He says he himself could not see them at that time when they were in the plantation, but he himself was at the distance of only twenty yards from the wall which separated the plantation from the road; that both Mellor and Thorpe were out of his sight, while they were in the plantation waiting for Mr. Horsfall's coming up; that he got sight of them again after the piece had been discharged. Their seeing one another, or not, must depend very much on the situation of the plantation, or the wood being more or less thick in the particular line in which they were viewed; they might not see each other, and yet they might be visible to persons looking from another point, as Parr describes himself to have seen them. I think there is no contradiction in that respect. He says that he himself did not see either Mellor or Thorpe, but he had seen Mellor have a pistol before that time, and that he saw it in the wood after this job (as he calls it) was done; that Mellor's pistol was a large horse pistol, the barrel of it nearly half a yard long; and that the account Mellor had given of it was, that it was a pistol that he had brought with him from Russia, where he had been, and that he had sold it to a man of the name of Hartley. Then Walker says, that when they first got to the plantation, Smith told him that the orders which they had from Mellor were, for them two to stand twenty yards distance from Mellor and Thorpe, and that they (Mellor and Thorpe) would stand in the nook of the plantation by the road side nearest to the Warren House, and that he and Smith were ordered to fire, if Mellor and Thorpe missed Mr. Horsfall. The consequence of that was, that they remained, as he says, twenty yards off, Mellor and Thorpe being close to the wall at the corner. It was intimated before, that one of the other two was to give a whistle, to intimate when Mr. Horsfall was coming; that no whistle was given, but one of the people, and he thinks Mellor, said Mr. Horsfall was coming; that the wall which separated the plantation from the road was about a yard and a quarter high; that he and Smith got up when they heard Mr. Horsfall was coming. From that account, I should suppose they had been upon the ground before, but that the wood was so thick he could not see what Mellor and Thorpe did, whether they ??sde

down, or stood. But he heard the pistol go off, and then, he Mr. Justice says, immediately upon the pistol going off, he and Smith Le Blanc's fled a bit backwards, and directly after they were joined by Summing Mellor and Thorpe. At that time Thorpe put his pistol into the witness, Benjamin Walker's, hand, saying, he would not go with it any further, and at that time he saw Mellor's pistol in his hand; that Mellor, on coming up to them, swore at them, and damned them for not shooting. He said that he had shot, and that they ought to have shot, however it had been, whether the others missed, or not; but, however, they did not shoot. He says, that at that time the pistol Thorpe put into his hand was warm in the barrel, and there was no priming, so that it had been clearly fired off. He says, he himself did not see Mr. Horsfall, for that he was in a thicker part of the plantation. This is the account he gives of what took place in the plantation, making the number of four persons agree with the account of four persons whom Parr had seen in the plantation as he rode up, just before the piece was fired and the report heard, which he gave an account of, and all in dark-coloured clothes, which, according to this man's account, they all had on. And then his account is, that after this had happened, they all four went straight forward out of the plantation, over several fields, to a wood called Dungeon Wood, and to get to which they crossed a road which goes between the fields at the back of the plantation and Dungeon Wood, a road from Huddersfield to Crossland; that they crossed that road, and when they crossed that road to Dungeon Wood, they were going as fast as they well could; that they all got into Dungeon Wood together; that he threw Thorpe's pistol down before he got into the wood, in crossing the closes, and that upon that George Mellor took it up; that what became of it afterwards he himself, Walker, did not know; that when they got into Dungeon Wood, Smith and he hid their pistols in some ant-hills in the wood; and that in Dungeon Wood these four persons separated, George Mellor and Thorpe ordering the other two to go towards Honley, being a different way from that which they themselves were going; that upon that George Mellor gave them two shillings, because they said they had no money to buy any beer; and accordingly they (the witness and Smith) separated, and saw no more of George Mellor and Thorpe at that time but proceeded on to Honley, which is about two miles from this Dungeon Wood; that he had a powder-horn from Mellor before he went, which, he says, he hid at the bottom of Dungeon Wood. Nothing particular turns upon that, for it was not found afterwards. Then he gives an account where he and Smith went to at Honley; that they went into a public-house, he does not know the name of it, it is at the bottom of Honley, on the left-hand side; and he says there was a collier drinking there, who appeared to be pretty Le Blanc's fresh in drinking; and that some men came into the public-house from Huddersfield market, and brought an account that up.

Mr. Horsfall had been shot; and upon that being said, Smith, the prisoner, who whistles particularly well, fell a whistling; and that this collier, who was in liquor, was pleased with the tune he was whistling, and got up, and attempted to dance. That is mentioned as a circumstance, because you will find it confirmed by other persons not connected with the transaction, who remember what passed at the time, from that circumstance. He says they drank as much as seven or eight pints of ale at this public-house, and left it between eight and nine o'clock, and it was near ten o'clock before they got home to their own house. That was the conclusion, according to his account, of what passed that night. The next morning, he says, the prisoner Thorpe came into the shop at Mr. Wood's, where George Mellor worked, and then George Mellor sent a workman, of the name of Sowden, to fetch this witness, Benjamin Walker, into the shop where Mellor worked. He says he went in, and he there found George Mellor, and Thorpe and Smith; and that then they ordered him to be sworn, in order to keep the counsel, to keep it secret; and he says, upon that occasion the prisoner Thorpe produced a book, which he said was a Bible, and that Mellor said he (Benjamin Walker) must be sworn; and that Varley, and Benjamin Walker's father, and a brother of his, William Walker, Sowden and Hall, had been sworn; that he took hold of the book, and Thorpe read the oath to him, while they held the book, but he does not know what it was that he read; and after it had been read, Thorpe ordered him to kiss the book, which, he says, he did. Then he gives this further account; that Mellor told him that he had hurt his finger with the firing, and that the next morning, when he saw him, his finger was tied up; that when they were in Dungeon Wood, after the deed had been done, the other prisoner's (Thorpe's) face was bloody, and the account he gave of it was, that he had'scratched it or hurt it in the plantation. And he further says, that the next day George Mellor told him that he and Thorpe had been at Joseph Mellor's, at the back of Dungeon Wood, after they had parted the day before.

He is then cross-examined on the part of the prisoners, and is asked, Where he had been for some time past; and he says, That he now comes immediately from the Castle here; that he was brought to York a few days ago, that he had been at Manchester, and from thence at Chester ten or eleven weeks, when he was brought here. He had been probably apprehended, or charged with being concerned in this foul transaction, and in consequence of that he was committed to safe custody,

custody, that he might be forthcoming, to have his testimony Mr. Justice submitted to a Jury, when this matter should be enquired into. Le Blanc's He says he supposes it to have been about six o'clock when this affair happened; that a man of the name of Varley, William Hall, and his father, and brother William, were all present when the pistol was delivered to him, and he expects that they saw it and heard the conversation; that Smith was in the other shop; that before firing in the plantation, they were never nearer than twenty yards to George Mellor or Thorpe, and that he was never in the nook or corner of the plantation; that he and Smith were behind, at nearly twenty yards distance.

He is then asked when he first made this discovery : He says he first told this to his mother and to his father, the same night, after he came home, and that his father had heard what they were about before; that his mother went to Mr. Radcliffe's about eleven or twelve weeks ago, in order to give this account, and to get her son examined, (as a witness, I suppose; ) that Thorpe and Mellor had been taken up before she went to Mr. Radcliffe's; he says they were not all taken up together, that Mellor and he were taken together; that a reward had been offered for the apprehension of the murderers, that he heard from Sowden, it was £. 2000. He is then asked, whether he had sent any message to a woman of the name of Hartley; and he says, that while he was in custody, he sent a person of the name of Mary Dransfield to request Mrs. Hartley to go before the Magistrate, to prove that he (Walker) had been at some other place at the time this murder was committed. He says that he told Mary Dransfield that he had told Mr. Radcliffe that Mrs. Hartley was the first who came into the yard to tell of Mr. Horsfall having been shot, and that he thought she would be a safeness to him by shewing he was in the yard at the time, which he was not; that he told a man of the name of Firth, that he knew nothing of the murder; that he was examined before Mr. Radcliffe, when he was first taken; that he had William Hall as a witness for him, and had sent to Mrs. Hartley to tell her that he had told Mr. Radcliffe that she was the first that came to tell Mrs. Wood, thinking she might say something to his advantage; and he says the reason was, that George Mellor had told him that Mrs. Hartley had been the person that had informed the people at the works, of Mr. Horsfall having been shot. That is the account which is given by this witness, who certainly by that account makes himself out to be one of the persons, who (if his account is true, and he had been standing at the bar) must have shared the fate, which the others will, accordingly as your Verdict passes for or against them.

Therefore you will examine the different parts of the account he has given, and see how far there are different circumstances proved by other witnesses, which induce you to doubt the truth of what he has said, or to believe that the account he has Le Blanc's given is true.

The next witness called, is a man of the name of William Hall. He does not stand here in the situation of an accomplice in this felony; but he does not stand free of blame, any more than several others who worked in this manufactory of Mr. Wood's; because language, dangerous in the highest degree, appears, according to their account, to have been used among them, without much fear of exposure, as to liberties intended to be taken with the lives and the property of others. But he does not appear to be a partaker in this particular transaction. The account he gives you is, that he was a cropper, employed at John Wood's; that he remembers the day on which Mr. Horsfall was shot; that on that day George Mellor applied to him for a Russian pistol, about four or five in the afternoon; that was a pistol which George Mellor had brought from Russia; that he, William Hall had bought it of a man at the top of Mirfield Moor, so that it belonged to William Hall; Mellor had sold it to one Richard Hartley, who sold it to somebody else, who sold it to Hall; and then he gives a description of it, that it had a brass hoop, and that the barrel of it was about afoot long; that he accordingly lent Mellor that very pistol that day. This, he says, was about four or five o'clock in the afternoon of this same day; and that is the same on which Benjamin Walker tells you application was made to him for the first time, that he would be a party to go out with them to shoot Mr. Horsfall. He then relates, that George Mellor went home with him (William Hall) to a place called the Yews, which is just by their manufactory, and there he took the pistol, and put it under his coat; that the pistol, when he gave it to him, was unloaded; that he saw Mellor load it at his (William Hall's) house; and that he put near two pipe-heads full of fine powder into it, and then put one ball into it, and afterwards some slugs that he flatted out from other balls by hammers, and put them with the one bullet he had first put in; and he put in another ball at top, and he rammed them all down; that seeing him do that, he asked Mellor whether he meant to fire it, for he thought that the pistol would jump back if he did; he said, "Yes," he meant to fire it, and meant to give Mr. Horsfall that, and that George Mellor set off directly. This is the account this man gives. He does not stand, I think, clear of blame, by any means. Being applied to by Mellor, to lend a pistol, he lends that pistol; he sees him load it in the way he describes; and if he believed the man sincere, and suffered him togo out of his presence without giving an alarm, he cannot stand as an innocent man.

However, this is the account he gives upon his oath. He says, George Mellor had before asked him (William Hall) to be of How the party, and to go out along with him, and he said he did not Mr. Justice like to go; that Mellor put the pistol into his pocket, and went Le Blanc's away. Then he gives the same account, as to the dress of George Summing Mellor, as Walker had done, that George Mellor had at that up.

time a bottle-green top coat on, and an under coat; that he had seen Thorpe that same afternoon in John Wood's shop, and that he was possessed of a pistol of nearly the same size with Mellor, and that when he saw him in the shop, he was braying some slugs at the window (which I understand to be hammering them out); that Benjamin Walker and Smith were in the shop at the time; and that when Mellor asked him (Hall) to go, and he refused, one of them said, he would go. He then gives an account of what passed the next day in this shop of John Wood, the father-in-law of Mellor; that Mellor produced a Bible, and that he (William Hall) was called into the shop; that Thorpe was sitting there, and a man of the name of Sowden, and one or two other men whose names he cannot recollect; that a paper was read over to them; he says he does not recollect the whole of what the paper contained, it was something about "if ever we revealed any thing concerning that business, we should be shot by the first brother;" that the Bible had been put into his hand before, and after it was read over, he (William Hall) kissed the Bible. He farther says, that he slept in the same room with Mellor on the night Mr. Horsfall was shot; that when they were going to bed,Mellor said he had hurt one of his fingers by firing off the pistol, and he did not know whether it would be right again or not. You have heard the account which this man before gave of the manner in which the pistol was loaded. He goes on to relate, that he heard that same evening, about seven o'clock, that Mr. Horsfall had been shot; that he heard it in Wood's shop, where Mellor works, and the woman who brought the account in was Dame Hartley; that that same night, as they were going to bed, Mellor told him that he and Thorpe had called at his (Mellor's) cousin's, Joseph Mellor, at Dungeon Bottom, and that they had left there the pistols in some flocks . This certainly is a very material fact, when you come to consider the evidence given on that part of the transaction, and compare it. He represents Mellor to have added, that there were two apprentices of Joseph Mellor's there, whom he had told to give the pistols to their master when he came home, and that he and Thorpe had gone through Lockwood to Huddersfield. That I fake to be the straight way from Dungeon Bottom, where they parted, to Huddersfield. The other. two men had gone, according to the account of Benjamin Walker, to Honley. Hall says, that Smith, who went the other way with Walker, came home that night, and he likewise slept in the same room with the witness; Smith said they had been at Honley, and that they had hid their pistols in Dungeon Wood as they were going through; (Benjamin Walker, you may remember, says they hid them in Le Blanc's some ant hills), and that they had some beer at Honley; that Summing the Sunday after this he saw the prisoner Mellor give Smith a guinea or a pound note; and that it was as much as three weeks after this, before he (Hall) got back the pistol which he had lent to George Mellor, and which, according to their account, had been left at the cousin Joseph Mellor's house, at Dungeon Wood. He says after that George Mellor asked him, one Sunday, to lend his pistol to go to Leeds, saying that there were some people come from Leeds, that wanted some arms; and accordingly he let it go. He gives this further account, that on the Saturday night, two or three days before Mellor was taken up, and when he was expecting to be taken up, he asked this witness if he would have that coat that, Thorpe had on, to go before Mr. Radcliffe the magistrate, as he (Hall) was the most like Thorpe; that he asked him to put on Thorpe's coat, that somebody might mistake him for Thorpe; that he was to go to the justice's with that coat on, when he was called on, and say he was the person who had gone with George Mellor to his cousin Joseph Mellor's, and had asked for employ in his work : but he would not do that. On the Sunday after Mr. Horsfall had been shot at, Smith asked him to go with him to seek the pistols that were hid in the ant-hills; they went to Dungeon Wood, and hunted for them among the ant-hills, but did not find them that morning, and they were never found. Two or three weeks after, Smith shewed him a pistol, and told him somebody had been with him, and found that of his. He is particularly asked whether, when Benjamin Walker was taken up for this offence, he had sent for him (William Hall) to be his witness. He says he was sent for, but was not examined on behalf of Walker, but was examined relative to some other subject of shear-breaking, that has nothing to do with this business. That is the evidence of William Hall; whose testimony, though he is not an accomplice, you will consider very attentively, as he is certainly very much tainted.

The next witness is Joseph Sowden, who says he is a cropper in Wood's shop; that he saw all the three prisoners the day Mr. Horsfall was shot; that at about half past four, or between that and five, he saw Thorpe and Mellor enter the shop, while he was getting some refreshment, with each a pistol in his hand; that was the shop where he and Ben.. Walker worked; Mellor worked in another shop. He says, Ben. Walker, William Hal, John Walker, and his son William, and a man of the name of Varley, were there. He says he heard George Mellor, the prisoner, order Benjamin Walker to go home, and to fetch top coats and a pistol; that.. Benjamin Walker accordingly went out, but he was not there when

when he returned, as that day he was working in what they call Mr. Justice the raising shop, that he did not see Smith that day at all. Le Blanc's He says that one pistol, which they came in with, was Smith's, Summing that the other was brass mounted, with a brass guard, and was three inches longer in the barrel than the other pistol; that he saw no more of any of the prisoners till he heard of Mr. Horsfall's death; that what he heard pass was in Wood's kitchen, after he had got home; he had before that heard of what had happened to Mr. Horsfall. The next morning, he says, the three prisoners and Walker, both jointly and severally, related to him the particulars of their lying in wait for Mr. Horsfall. He did not repeat the particulars, but he said that they all of them had related what had happened, and that the next morning, or the morning-after, Thorpe called him out of the shop, and he followed Thorpe into the press shop; that Thorpe said to him, "Sowden, I must have you sworn to keep the murder of Horsfall a secret in all its circumstances".

Sowden states, that he said he never took an oath, either legal or illegal, in his life; that he never had had occasion to be examined before a magistrate, and he did not chuse to take any oath; upon which, George Mellor swore that he should take it, or he would shoot him dead; that through fear of his life, knowing that he had it in his power to realize his threats, and having reason to believe that he never went without loaded pistols, he submitted, and received the oath, which was administered in the press room, that Thorpe produced the oath out of his pocket, and that the substance of it was , to keep the murder of Mr. Horsfall a secret in all its circumstances, under pain of being followed by the most unceasing vengeance, and finally put out of existence by the first brother he should meet; that there was a Bible at the time produced; that they afterwards, by the same threats, forced him (Sowden) to be the person to administer that oath to all who knew of the murder of Mr. Horsfall, and that he accordingly administered it to Benjamin Walker, John and William Walker, James Varley, William Hall, and Smith, who were all the persons that appear not only concerned in it, but aware of the communications which had been made from one to the other.

He says, upon cross-examination, that when Mellor came in, he ordered Ben. Walker to go home and fetch great coats and pistols; and, that he did not himself know at that time what they were going about.

They then produced on the part of the prosecution, John Walker, the father of Benjamin Walker, who had been referred to as a person who was in the shop and heard what was passing, and as having been sworn. They called him up, to ask, whether he was there at the time, in this shop; and in order that the other side might have an opportunity of putting what questions they pleased to him. However, no questions were Le Blanc's put to him. This is the evidence as to what took place on the day on which Mr. Horsfall was shot, on the night when they returned home, and the next day, when, according to the account given by these witnesses, all those persons who knew any thing of the transaction, were bound by this abominable oath (if it was administered) to keep this matter secret.

They then proceed to the other points of the case opened on the part of the prosecution, as circumstances to affect the different prisoners in the parts they took in the transaction after the murder of Mr. Horsfall had been committed. And they first call Martha Mellor, who says that her husband, Joseph Mellor, is the cousin of the prisoner George Mellor; that she and her husband live at Dungeon, about two hundred yards from Dungeon Wood; and that to come from Mr. Radcliffe's plantation to their house, the nearest way is to come through Dungeon Wood. She says that she heard of Mr. Horsfall having been fired at, between eight and nine o'clock in the evening on which it happened, by the report of some persons that came in. She states that her family consisted of her husband, herself, one child, four apprentice boys, and a servant girl.

She speaks of one of the apprentices having misbehaved, and run away; and two of the apprentices being here. She says that her husband is a cloth-dresser; that on the same evening on which she heard afterwards that Mr. Horsfall had been shot, she saw the prisoner at the bar, George Mellor, about a quarter after six , when he came to her house with another person whom she did not know; that they came first into the workshop, and then from the workshop into the house; that George Mellor asked her, if her husband was within; she said that he was gone to market; he then asked, if they wanted a man to work; upon which she said, No, there was no occasion. They had no work, I suppose, in which they wanted to employ him. He then asked her to lend him a handkerchief; it does not appear for what purpose; and she lent him a black silk handkerchief; and then George Mellor asked her to allow the gentleman who was with him to wash himself, and she accordingly allowed him to wash himself; and she describes George Mellor as having on a dark-coloured coat, but no top coat on at that time, that is, when he came into the house, he having been in the shop. She says the gentleman who was with him had a dark-coloured top-coat on.

They stopped there about a quarter of an hour. George Mellor asked her to lend him a coat; she told him her husband'supper coat was in the shop; and accordingly both these men went through the shop the same way they had come into the house; and they said, if they did not meet her husband, they might probably call again about ten o'clock that night.

She says, she thinks it was a quarter past six o'clock when Mr. Justice they came, for she guessed they had been gone about half an Summing hour before her husband came home; and she thinks he came up home about seven o'clock. She is asked, whether the prisoner, George Mellor, has borne a good character; and she says he has. Then the whole of this transaction is closed by the account of the apprentices. They had seen these persons come in, for they came into the shop first. Durrance, one of these apprentices, who is about seventeen years old, says, he saw George Mellor at his master's house at Dungeon Bottom this night, when Mr. Horsfall was shot; that he was in the shop when George Mellor came in, and a man with him, who he thinks was like Thorpe; that at that time they had dark-coloured top coats on, but George Mellor took off his top coat, and put it on a brushing-stone, and he then had a green coat on; that he asked the apprentice to go up stairs with him, and he went up with him; the other man stayed below; that when they got up stairs, George Mellor gave the apprentice two pistols, that they might be two feet long, that they put these two pistols under some flocks to conceal them, that he himself did not take particular notice of them to know whether they were loaded or not, and that George Mellor told him he had no occasion to say any thing about them; but he says that when his master came home, he (very properly) told his master who had been there, and what they had left there; that he and his fellow apprentice stopped at his work, and George Mellor went down; that he shewed the pistols to his fellow apprentices, Kinder and Oldham, and that Kinder told him at the time that it was George Mellor, he himself not knowing him. Now, he says, he thinks that the first prisoner is the man. He says, when his master came home, he told him his brother had been there, and what he had left there;' that he
shewed his master, Joseph Mellor, the pistols, and that his master, Joseph Mellor, and the apprentice, took them from under the flocks, and carried them into the laith , and hid them under some straw in the laith. He says he has himself been before Mr. Radcliffe the Magistrate, and that after he had been before Mr. Radcliffe, George Mellor gave him (this apprentice) five shillings, and bid him give the other apprentice, Kinder, half of it, to speak the truth of what they had seen; but he told him to keep the pistols a secret, that is, to speak the truth, but not the whole truth.

On his cross-examination, he says they stayed but a short time; that the time when his master came' home was an hour, or an hour and a half, after these men had been at the house.

Then the other apprentice, John Kinder, who saw Mellor come in, and told his fellow-apprentice who he was, is called.

He says that he remembers the night when Mr. Horsfall was Le Blanc's shot, that he saw George Mellor come in, and Durrance asked Summing him who that was that came, and he told him he thought it up.

was George Mellor; that he himself was in the fold, that he met Mellor coming down again after he had been in the shop; that Durrance shewed him the two pistols Mellor had left there, that they took them from under the flocks, and he thinks they were not loaded, and that for a very good reason, because he opened the pan and blew through the touch-hole; and he confirms the account of having received from Durrance half a crown, which, Durrance says, George Mellor had given him to speak the truth of what they had seen, but not to say any thing about the pistols.

Joseph Mellor the cousin, who was not at home when they came, is the next witness. He says he was at market on this afternoon, that he got home, as nearly as he can guess, about seven in the evening; that Durrance the apprentice, when he came home, shewed him two pistols; that he had, before he got home, heard that Mr. Horsfall had been shot, and when Durrance shewed him the pistols, he went with him, and hid them in the laith, because he was afraid of their being found upon his premises. He says the pistols were nearly of a size, but one was of a larger bore than the other, the larger one was brass-mounted, and he himself had heard George Mellor before say, that he had brought a pistol from Russia. He says this too, which is a material circumstance, that he found a dark-coloured top coat upon the brushing-stone in his shop, and in the pockets of that there were two ball cartridges, and he found a dark bottle-green coat behind the door, but neither of them belonged to him; that a man of the name of James Varley came the morning after, and he told Varley he had the pistols; and in about a week after the pistols were gone, but how they got away we do not know, there is no account of who fetched them away. He also says that he had left a top coat of his, which was a drab top coat, at home, and that was gone.

Now, the evidence of these four last witnesses, is evidence, which, as it respects George Mellor in particular, calls very much for some explanation; because on this very night, and at this very time, according to the evidence of one whom you cannot suspect at all of being influenced by any bias against these prisoners, George Mellor and a stranger came to the house of the cousin, and having been before in the shop, asked the wife of the cousin, whether they could give any work to this man who was with him? She said, No. He then asked for the loan of a handkerchief; and it appears by the evidence before you, that one of them had hurt a fing , and one of them had scratched his cheek in going through the wood. I saw them come into the house, that each of the two persons who came, had dark-coloured top coats on; that they took them off; that George Mellor laid his upon the brushing-stone, and there was another dark-coloured top coat hung behind the door, which Joseph Mellor found when he came home; that both having top coats when they came (and dark-coloured top coats) George Mellor asked his cousin for her husband's coat, and took away a light-coloured drab coat of the husband's, which was hanging up there. That, to be sure, has the appearance very much of a desire of changing clothes, so that the dress in which they had been, and might have been observed, should not tend a tall to betray them. But there is another circumstance: the first thing done by George Mellor, and this person, who is not recognized except by one of the apprentices, is to hide a brace of pistols, which the apprentice is desired to say nothing about, and they are both of them discharged pistols; they are afterwards taken into a place of concealment, because the cousin, Joseph Mellor, thinks it not safe for them to be found on his premises; and they are afterwards fetched away, but nobody is here to tell us who fetched them. Joseph Mellor, when he comes home about an hour after, finds his coat gone, but two dark-coloured top coats are left, one on the brushing-stone and one behind the door; in the pocket of one of which there are two balls. This is left wholly unexplained. This is fixed to be George Mellor, by the wife of the cousin. And if these circumstances, were unconnected with this transaction, some account might have been given by evidence, with what transaction they are connected, so as to shew that they are to be considered features in some other transaction, and not features applicable to that which is the subject of our present enquiry. That is the end of the evidence, with respect to what took place at Dungeon Bottom.

The only additional evidence is that which is produced by Mr. Staveley, the Governor of the Gaol. The top coat taken off Mellor, the prisoner, when he came here, which is acknowledged by Mrs. Mellor to be the same that had been left at her house, and Joseph Mellor says is the same that he found left at his house, when he got home that evening.

The Counsel for the prosecution next call witnesses who had nothing to do with this transaction, for the purpose of giving an account of what they saw in the neighbourhood of this plantation. Abraham Willey says he was a workman for Mr. Radcliffe; that he was at work about two hundred yards from the spot where Mr. Horsfall was shot, that is, in a field which I would describe as behind the plantation, with respect to the situation of the public road along which Mr. Horsfall was travelling; that he heard a gun, but did not see it, being in the stable. He says it came from the nook of the plantation next the road; that upon hearing it, or soon after, he went and saw four men running down by the end of the building, across the fields between the plantation and Dungeon Wood, and making for Dungeon Wood; that they were not nearer to him than fifty yards, and that all the four men (he agrees in the account given by Parr and others) had dark-coloured coats on at that time; and he says that this must have been the time Mr. Horsfall was shot, because in two or three minutes afterwards, his two boys, who are referred to by another of the witnesses, as being collecting dung in the road, came, and told him what had happened to Mr. Horsfall : So that the point of time is fixed.

Then further as to that part of the case, a person of the name of Hartley was going along the road from Crossland to Lockwood, which runs at the back of the fields, and of Mr. Radcliffe's plantation, and would give him the command of the sight of those fields and of Dungeon Wood. He says, as he was going along that road, he heard the report of a piece, and that when he got to the top of the close of land where he was, he saw four men come out of Mr. Radcliffe's plantation, and jump over the wall that went to Dungeon Wood, and so into Dungeon Wood; that they had all dark-coloured clothes on; that as they were getting over the wall, he observed that one of them had a pistol, with a brass end to it, under his coat, because the coat flew back as he jumped over the wall, and on the man looking back, and, as he supposes, taking notice of him, he pulled his coat over the end of the pistol. That again confirms the account, that the number who did this consisted of four, and that they immediately made off that way.

Mary Robinson, the landlady of the public-house at Honley, to which the prisoner Smith and the accomplice (according to the account of Benjamin Walker) retired after the murder had taken place, says, that her husband keeps a public-house at Honley, on the left hand, at the bottom of the town; that they heard that Mr. Horsfall was shot on the same evening, by some market people coming in; that on that evening two young men came to their house, and had something to drink; that she recollects a collier being at her house, who had got a little fresh with liquor; and that when the news was brought, soon after these young men came in, that Mr. Horsfall was shot, Smith, one of these two young men, who whistled very well, began to whistle, and pleased the collier, and that he began dancing. She says that the time when the young men came in, was between seven and eight in the evening, and that they went away a little before nine. That tallies nearly with the account Benjamin Walker gives. And she says, that when her husband came in, he asked them where Mr. Justice they came from? and they said they came from Longroyd Le Blanc's Bridge; which is the place where these two persons lived.
;
This is the Evidence on the part of the prosecution, which consists of the evidence not only of Benjamin Walker, who is, in the strictest sense of the word, an accomplice (going out with them, and continuing with them, though he says, the latter part of the time against his will, being afraid to go back) but of the different other witnesses belonging to the same manufactory, who appear to have been witnesses to preparations going on, and declarations made after the act had been done, so as to know what had been done, and for a considerable time at least never to have disclosed it, though they were not themselves parties in the act itself. There is the confirmatory evidence of those persons who saw the four men, immediately after the report, making off in the direction described by the accomplice, and dressed, as is described by the accomplice, all, in dark clothes. And above all, there is the transaction which took place at the house of the cousin of George Mellor, where the two dark top coats, and the pistols not loaded, were left, under the circumstances which the witnesses have detailed
to you; and likewise what took place at the public house where Walker and Smith wert, according to Walker's account.


[ TO DO in witness.md]

 The Jury retired at half past seven, and returned at five minutes before eight, finding
George Mellor
William Thorpe -
Thomas Smith -
- -
Guilty.
Guilty.
-
Guilty.
The prisoners being severally asked in the usual manner, by the Clerk of Arraigns, if they had any thing to say, why sentence of Death should not be pronounced upon them?
answered,
Mellor-I have nothing to say, only I am not guilty.

Thorpe I am not guilty, Sir; evidence has been given false against me; that I declare.
Smith Not guilty, Sir

r. Justice LE BLANC immediately passed sentence of Death upon them, in the following words : L
" You, the several prisoners at the bar, have been tried and convicted of wilful and deliberate Murder; under all circumstances an offence of the deepest malignity, but under the circumstances which have appeared in this case in particular, as far as one crime of the same denomination can be distinguished from another, this maybe pronounced a crime of the blackest dye. In other cases, the Court has been able to discover something which might work upon the passions of mankind, and might induce them to commit an act, at which, in their cooler moments, their minds would have revolted.

But, in the present case, the crime was committed against a man, who appears to have given no offence to any one of you, except that he was suspected of having expressed himself with a manly feeling against those who had set up a right to violate all property, and to take away the life of any man who had been supposed to encourage others to do, (what I trust there still are men sufficient in this country to do) to stand manfully forward in defence of their property. For that reason, he was marked out by you as an object of the most cowardly revenge.

You, attempting to associate with yourselves such men as you could prevail upon to join in your wicked purposes, way-lay him at the moment when he is returning home, almost in mid-day, with a boldness which one has scarcely ever witnessed in trying offences of this description. But in the course of your trial, proceedings have come before the Court, at which human nature shudders. That the national character should be so debased; that men, who ought to boast of their character as Britons, should have dared to hold forth, in the language in which you have held forth, and with so little discretion, that assassination and destruction of property were instruments in your hands, to be exercised at your pleasure, and against any person who had happened to offend you-independently of this, that you should have dared to take into your hands the Holy Scriptures, and to administer an impious oath to those who were cognizant of your offence, calling the Almighty as a witness (that Being whom you were conscious you had offended in the highest degree,) calling upon Him for vengeance upon the heads of those who should discover your crimes-these are circumstances which have appeared in the course of this trial, and which have scarcely ever appeared in the course of any trial which has been brought before a court of justice.

"It is not upon the testimony of one, or of two, or of three witnesses, that your guilt depends; and let me advise you not to lay that balm to your souls, that you have been deprived by false accusation, and by false oaths, of your lives. A chain of circumstances has been discovered in the course of thisrial, which does not depend upon the oath of any one, or Sentence, two or three men, whom you may denominate even as bad as yourselves. But even from the testimony of those, who, if they had not been honest to a certain degree, would have given a different evidence, it is clear that two at least of you were guilty; and as little doubt remains, from other evidence, upon the guilt of the third of you.

"In the shop where you have worked, some of you appear to have gained such an ascendancy over the minds and over the consciences of the workmen, who were in some degree under your control, that you could mould and fashion them to any wicked purpose you yourselves might imagine. Their eyes, I hope, will be opened by the fate which awaits you; they will see, that though for a short time the career of the wicked may continue, yet the law is sure at length to overtake them.

"To you, the unfortunate persons who stand at the bar, (for every man who has disgraced his character as you have, must be deemed unfortunate) to you the only kindness I can offer, isin the advice to prepare, as speedily as you can, for that execution of this sentence, which must shortly await you; to make the best use you can of the period still allotted to you in this world-longer far than was allowed to the unfortunate person who was the object of your revenge; that you will take the opportunity of making your peace with that Almighty Being whom you have offended; that by the sincerity of your repentance, the fulness of your confession, and the acknowledgment of your offences, you may endeavour to obtain that forgiveness in the world to come, which I cannot hold out to you any hopes of obtaining in this world.
"It remains only for me to pass upon you the sentence of the law. That sentence is, That you, the three prisoners at the bar, be taken from hence to the place from whence you came, and from thence, on Friday next, to the place of execution; that you be there severally hanged by the neck until you are dead, and your bodies afterwards delivered to the surgeons to be dissected and anatomized, according to the directions of the statute. 