# Secret Committee Report

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001476/18120721/005/0002
London Courier and Evening Gazette - Tuesday 21 July 1812

TO DO - from Cluade



REPORT TO THE HOUSE OF LORDS  
from the Secret Committee appointed to enquire into the late disturbances.

YOUR Committee in pursuing the Enquiry referred to their consideration have endeavoured to ascertain the origin of the disturbances which have arisen in the different parts of the country, with respect to which they have obtained information, the manner in which those disturbances have been carried on, the objects to which they have been apparently directed, the means used to suppress them, the effects of those means, and the state of those parts of the country within which the disturbances have prevailed.

The disposition to combined and disciplined riot and disturbance which has attracted the attention of Parliament, and excited apprehension of the most dangerous consequences, seems to have been first manifested in the neighbourhood of the Town of Nottingham in November last, by the destruction of a great number of newly-invented stocking-frames, by small parties of men, principally Stocking Weavers, who assembled in various places round Nottingham.

By degrees the Rioters became more numerous and more formidable, many were armed and divided in different parties, disturbed the whole country between Nottingham and Mansfield, destroying frames almost without resistance. This spirit of discontent (amongst other causes to which it has been attributed) was supposed to have been excited or called into action by the use of a new machine which enabled the Manufacturers to employ Women in work in which Men had been before employed, and by the refusal of the Manufacturers to pay the wages at the rate which the Weavers demanded; and their discontent was probably heightened by the increased price of provisions, particularly of corn. The men engaged in these disturbances were at first principally those thrown out of employ by the use of the new machinery, or by their refusal to work at the rates offered by the Manufacturers; and then partially sought the destruction of frames owned or worked by those who were willing to work at the lower rates; in consequence of the resistances opposed to the outrages of the rioters, in the course of which one of them was killed, they became still more exasperated and more violent, till the Magistrates thought it necessary to require the assistance of a considerable armed force, which was promptly assembled, consisting at first principally of Local Militia and Volunteer Yeomanry, to whom were added above 400 Special Constables; the Rioters were then dispersed, and it was hoped that the disturbances had been by these means suppressed.

Before the end of the month of November, however, the outrages were renewed, they became more serious, were more systematically conducted, and at length the rioters began in several villages, where they destroyed the frames, to levy at the same time contributions for their subsistence, which rapidly increased their numbers, and early in December the Outrages were in some degree extended into Derbyshire and Leicestershire, where many frames were broken.

In the mean time a considerable force both of infantry and cavalry had been sent to Nottingham, and the Commanding Officer of the District was ordered to repair thither; and in January two of the most experienced Police Magistrates were dispatched to Nottingham for the purpose of assisting the local authorities in their endeavours to restore tranquillity in the disturbed districts.

The systematic combination however with which the outrages were conducted, the terror which they inspired, and the disposition of many of the lower orders to favour rather than oppose them, made it very difficult to discover the offenders, to apprehend them, or to obtain evidence to convict the criminals who were apprehended of the crimes with which they were charged. Some however were afterwards proceeded against at the Spring Assizes at Nottingham, and seven persons were convicted of different offences, and sentenced to transportation.

In the mean time acts were passed for establishing a police in the disturbed districts, upon the ancient system of watch and ward, and for applying to the destruction of stocking frames the punishment before applied by law to the destruction of other machinery.

The discontent which had thus first appeared about Nottingham, and had in some degree extended into Derbyshire and Leicestershire, had before this period been communicated to other parts of the country. Subscriptions for the persons taken into custody in Nottinghamshire were solicited in the month of February at Stockport, in Cheshire, where anonymous letters were at the same time circulated, threatening to destroy the machinery used in the manufactures of that place, and in that and the following months attempts were made to set on fire two different manufactories. The spirit of disorder then rapidly spread through the neighbourhood, inflammatory placards inviting the people to a general rising were dispersed, illegal oaths were administered, riots were produced in various places, houses were plundered by persons in disguise, and a report was industriously circulated, that a general rising would take place on the first of May, or early in that month.

This spirit of riot and disturbance was extended to many other places, and particularly to Ashton-under-Line, Eccles, and Middleton; at the latter place the manufactory of Mr. Burton was attacked on the 20th of April, and although the rioters were then repulsed, and five of their number were killed by the military force assembled to protect the works, a second attack was made on the 22d of April, and Mr. Burton's dwelling-house was burnt before military assistance could be brought to his support; when troops arrived to protect the works, they were fired upon by the rioters, and before the rioters could be dispersed several of them were killed and wounded; according to the accounts received, at least three were killed and about twenty wounded.

On the 14th of April riots again prevailed at Stockport; the house of Mr. Goodwin was set on fire, and his steam-looms were destroyed. In the following night a meeting of rioters on a heath about two miles from the town, for the purpose as supposed of being trained for military exercise, was surprised and dispersed; contributions were also levied in the neighbourhood at the houses of Gentlemen and Farmers.

About the same time riots also took place at Manchester, and in the neighbourhood; of which the general pretence was the high price of provisions. On the 26th and 27th of April the people of Manchester were alarmed by the appearance of some thousands of strangers in their town, the greater part of them however disappeared on the 28th; part of the Local Militia had been then called out, and a large military force had arrived, which it was supposed had over-awed those who were disposed to disturbance. An apprehension, however, prevailed, of a general rising in May, and in the neighbourhood of the town many houses were plundered. Nocturnal meetings for the purpose of military exercise were frequent; arms were seized in various places by the disaffected; the House of a farmer near Manchester was plundered, and a labourer coming to his assistance was shot.

The manner in which the disaffected have carried on their proceedings, is represented as demonstrating an extraordinary degree of concert, secrecy, and organization. Their signals were well concerted and well established, and any attempt to detect and lay hold of the offenders was generally defeated.

The same spirit of riot and disturbance appeared at Bolton-in-the Moors. So early as the 6th of April, intelligence was given, that at a Meeting of Delegates from several places it had been resolved, that the manufactory at West Haughton, in that neighbourhood, should be destroyed, but that at a subsequent Meeting it had been determined, that the destruction of this manufactory should be postponed. On the 24th of April however, the destruction of this manufactory was accomplished. Intelligence having been obtained of the intended attack, a military force was sent for its protection, and the assailants dispersed before the arrival of the military, who then returned to their quarters; the rioters taking advantage of their absence, assailed and forced the manufactory, set it on fire, and again dispersed before the military could be brought again to the spot.

Symptoms of the same spirit appeared at Newcastle-under-Lyne, Wigan, Warrington, and other Towns; and the contagion in the mean time had spread to Carlisle and into Yorkshire.

In Huddersfield, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, and in the neighbourhood, the destruction of dressing and shearing machines and shears began early in February; fire-arms were seized during the course of March, and a Constable was shot at in his own house. In March a great number of machines belonging to Mr. Vicarman were destroyed, and in April the destruction of Bradley Mills, near Huddersfield was threatened, and afterwards attempted, but the Mills were protected by a guard, which defeated the attempt.
About the same time the machinery of Mr. Rhodes' Mill at Tentwistle, near to Stockport, was utterly destroyed; and Mr. Horsfall, a respectable merchant and mill-owner, in the neighbourhood of Huddersfield, was shot about six o'clock in the afternoon, in broad day-light, on the 28th of April returning from market, and died on the 30th of the same month.

A Reward of 2000*l.* was offered for the discovery of the murderers, but no discovery had been made, though it appears that he was shot by four persons, each of whom lodged a ball in his body; that when he fell, the populace surrounded and reviled him, instead of offering assistance, and no attempt was made to secure the assassins, who were seen to retire to an adjoining wood. Some time after, a young woman was attacked in the streets of Leeds, and nearly murdered, her skull being fractured; and the supposed reason for this violence was an apprehension that she had been near the spot when Mr. Horsfall was thus murdered, and might therefore be able to give evidence which might lead to the detection of the murderers.

The town of Leeds had for some time before been much alarmed by information that attacks were intended to be made on places in the town and its neighbourhood, which induced the Magistrates to desire a strong military force, and to appoint a great number of respectable inhabitants of the town Special Constables, by which means the peace of the town was in a great degree preserved.

Early, however, in the morning of the 24th of March, the Mills of Messrs. Thompsons at Rawdon, a large village about eight miles from Leeds, was attacked by a large body of armed men, who proceeded with great regularity and caution, first seizing the watchman at the Mill; and placing guards at every neighbouring cottage, threatening death to any who should attempt to give alarm, and then forcibly entering the mill, they completely destroyed the machinery. In the following night, notwithstanding the precautions adopted, the buildings belonging to Messrs. Dickinsons in Leeds, were forcibly entered, and the whole of the goods there, consisting principally of cloths, were cut to pieces. Many other persons in Leeds were threatened with similar treatment, and the proceedings at this place are represented to have had for their object the destruction of all descriptions of goods prepared otherwise than by manual labour.

At Leversedge, near Hockmondwicke, which is in the neighbourhood of the moors dividing Lancashire and Yorkshire, an attack was made early in the morning of the 12th of April by a body of armed men, represented to have been between two and three hundred in number, on a valuable mill belonging to Mr. Cartwright. The mill was defended with great courage by Mr. Cartwright, the proprietor, with the assistance of three of his men and five soldiers; and the assailants were at length compelled to retire, being unable to force an entrance into the mill, and their ammunition probably failing. Two of the assailants were left on the spot desperately wounded, and were secured, but died of their wounds. Many others are supposed to have been also wounded, and information was afterwards obtained of the death of one of them. When the assailants retired, they declared a determination to take Mr. Cartwright's life by any means. One of the wounded men who was left on the spot was only nineteen years of age, and son of a man in a respectable situation in the neighbourhood; but neither this man nor the other prisoner would make any confession respecting their confederates in the outrage. The neighbouring inhabitants, who assembled about the mill, after the rioters had retired, only expressed their regret that the attempt had failed. A vast concourse of people attended the funeral of the young man before described, who died of his wounds; and there was found written on walls in many places, "Vengeance for the Blood of the Innocent".

The threats against Mr. Cartwright's life were attempted to be put into execution on the 18th of April, when he was twice shot at in the road from Huddersfield to Rawfold. About the same time a shot was fired at a special Constable on duty at Leeds, and a ball was fired at night into the house of Mr. Armitage, a Magistrate in the neighbourhood, and lodged in the ceiling of his bed-room; Col. Campbell also, who commanded the troops at Leeds, was shot at in the night of May 8, upon returning to his own house, by two men, who discharged their pieces at him within the distance of twenty yards, and immediately after a third shot was fired, directed towards the room usually occupied by Colonel Campbell and his family.

At Horbury, near Wakefield, valuable mills were attacked on the 9th of April by an armed body, supposed to consist of 300 men. The machinery and considerable property were destroyed. The men who committed the outrage were seen on the road between Wakefield and Horbury, marching in regular sections, preceded by a mounted party with drawn swords, and followed by the same number of mounted men as a rear guard. They were supposed to have assembled from Huddersfield, Duesbury, Hickmondwicke, Guildersome, Morley, Wakefield, and other places.

In many parts of this District of Country the well-disposed were so much under the influence of terror, that the Magistrates were unable to give protection by putting the Watch and Ward Act in execution, and the lower orders are represented as generally either abettors of or participators in the outrages committed, or so intimidated, that they dared not to interfere.

At Sheffield the storehouse of arms of the Local Militia was surprised in the month of May, a large proportion of the arms were broken by the mob, and many taken away; this disturbance, however, seems to have been followed by no further consequences, and the remainder of the arms were secured.

But during the months of May and June depredations of different kinds, and particularly the seizure of arms, continued to be nightly committed in other parts of Yorkshire; and it is represented that in the neighbourhood of Huddersfield and Birstall the arms of all the peaceable inhabitants had been swept away by bands of armed robbers. In consequence of these outrages the Vice-Lieutenant of the West Riding, the Deputy-Lieutenants and Magistrates assembled at Wakefield on the 11th of June, and came to a resolution, "That the most alarming consequences were to be apprehended from the nightly depredations which had been committed by bodies of armed men." At the same time this remarkable circumstance was stated, that amongst one hundred depositions taken by the Magistrates of the facts of robberies committed, there was only one as to the perpetrator of the crime.

During the latter part of this period, it is represented that nightly robberies of arms, lead and ammunition, were prevalent in the districts bounded by the rivers Air and Calder, and that the patroles which went along both banks of the Calder found the people in the ill-affected villages up at midnight, and heard the firing of small arms at short distances from them, thro' the whole night, to a very great extent, which they imagined proceeded from parties at drill. In the corner of Cheshire, touching upon Yorkshire and Lancashire, in the neighbourhood and to the eastward of Ashton, Stockport, and Moultram, nocturnal meetings were more frequent than ever, and the seizure of arms carried on with great perseverance. Peculiar difficulties are stated to exist in this quarter, from the want of Magistrates.

Your Committee have not thought it necessary to detail, or even to state all the outrages which have been committed in different parts of the country, but have selected from the great mass of materials before them, such facts only as appeared to them sufficient to mark the extent and nature of those disturbances.

The causes alleged for these destructive proceedings have been generally the want of employment for the working manufacturers, a want, however, which has been the least felt in some of the places where the disorders have been most prevalent, the application of machinery to supply the place of labour, and the high price of provisions; but it is the opinion of persons, both in civil and military stations, well acquainted with the state of the country, an opinion grounded upon various informations from different quarters now before your Committee, but which, for obvious reasons they do not think proper to detail, that the views of some of the persons engaged in these proceedings have extended to revolutionary measures of the most dangerous description.

Their proceedings manifest a degree of caution and organization which appears to flow from the direction of some persons under whose intentions they act; but it is the opinion of a person, whose situation gives him great opportunities of information, that their leaders, although they may possess considerable influence, are still of the lowest orders; men of desperate fortunes, who have taken advantage of the pressure of the moment, to work upon the inferior class, through the medium of the Associations in the manufacturing parts of the country.

The general persuasion of the persons engaged in these transactions appear however to be, that all the Societies in the country are directed in their motions by a Secret Committee, and that this Secret Committee is therefore the great mover of the whole machine; and it is established by the various information to which the Committee has before alluded, that Societies are formed in different parts of the country; that these Societies are governed by their respective Secret Committees; that Delegates are continually dispatched from one place to another, for the purpose of concerting their plans; and that secret signs are arranged, by which the persons engaged in these conspiracies are known to each other. The form of the oath or engagement administered to those who are enlisted in these Societies, also refers expressly to the existence of such Secret Committees.

The object of this oath is to prevent discovery, by deterring through the fear of assassination those who take it from impeaching others, and by binding them not to assassinate those by whom any of the persons engaged may be impeached. These oaths appear to have been administered to a considerable extent; copies of them have been obtained from various quarters, and though slightly differing in terms, they are so nearly the same, as to prove the systematic nature of the concert by which they are administered.

The oath itself is of so atrocious a nature, that your Committee have thought it right to insert the form, as it appears in one of those copies:

"I *A, B.* of my own voluntary will, do declare and solemnly swear, that I never will reveal to any person or persons under the canopy of Heaven the names of the persons who compose this Secret Committee, their proceedings, meeting, places of abode, dress, features, connections, or any thing else that might lead to a discovery of the same either by word or deed, or sign, under the penalty of being sent out of the world by the first brother who shall meet me, and my name and character blotted out of existence, and never to be remembered but with contempt and abhorrence; and I further now do swear, that I will use my best endeavours to punish by death any traitor or traitors, should any rise up amongst us, wherever I can find him or them, and though he should fly to the verge of nature, I will pursue him with increasing vengeance. So help me God, and bless me to keep this my oath inviolable."

The Military Organization carried on by persons engaged in these Societies has also proceeded to an alarming length; they assemble in large numbers, in general by night, upon Heaths or Commons, which are numerous and extensive in some of the Districts where the disturbances have been most serious; so assembled they take the usual military precautions of Paroles and Countersigns; then Muster Rolls are called over by numbers not by names, they are directed by Leaders sometimes in disguise, they place sentries to give alarm at the approach of any persons whom they may suspect of meaning to interrupt or give information of their proceedings, and they disperse instantly at the firing of a gun, or other signal agreed upon, and so disperse as to avoid detection. They have in some instances used signals by rockets or blue lights, by which they communicate intelligence to their parties.

They have procured a considerable quantity of arms, by the depredations which are daily and nightly continued; they have plundered many places of lead, for the purpose of making musket balls, and have made some seizures of gunpowder.

Their progress in discipline appears from the representation before given of the two attacks upon the mills of Rawdon and Henbury; and the money, which has been in many instances obtained by contribution or plunder, answers the purpose of support, and may serve as an inducement to many persons to engage in these disturbances.

The system of intimidation produced not only by the oaths and engagements before mentioned, or by threats of violence, but by the attack and destruction of houses and factories, by actual assassination in some instances, and attempts at assassination in others, under circumstances which have hitherto generally baffled all endeavours to discover and bring to justice the offenders, all tend to render these proceedings greatly alarming to the country. In many parts the quiet inhabitants consider themselves as enjoying protection only as far as the military force can extend its exertions, and look upon the rest of the country where the disturbances take place as at the mercy of the rioters.

The legal proceedings at Nottingham checked the disposition to disturbance in that quarter, but this effect did not extend to other parts of the country; and though the proceedings under the Special Commissions since issued, and the convictions and executions at Lancaster and Chester appeared to make a considerable impression, they have been far from restoring peace and security to the disturbed districts.

A great military force has been assembled; the Local Militia has been in many places called out, and has done good service; the Yeomanry Corps have been active and highly useful. Many of the Magistrates have zealously exerted their powers, some of them at great personal hazard. In many places great numbers of Special Constables have been appointed from amongst the more respectable inhabitants, and the Watch and Ward Act has been in some places put in force, though attempted without effect in others, or abandoned from circumstances already stated. All these efforts have proved insufficient effectually to put down the spirit of disturbance; and it is therefore the decided opinion of your Committee that some further measures should be immediately adopted by Parliament for affording more effectual protection to the lives and properties of his Majesty's subjects, and for suppressing a system of turbulence and disorder which has already proved destructive of the tranquillity and highly injurious to the property and welfare of some of the most populous and important districts of the country, and which, unless effectually checked, may lead to consequences still more extensive and dangerous.
