# Witnesses for Defence in Trial of Mellor et al.

"It was in proof, by a person of the name of Armitage, who kept a public-house at Crosland-Moor, called the Warren House,
that he had seen Mr. Horsfall go to Huddersfield market in the morning; that he seldom missed going on a market-day; that
he had called at his house on his return back, and he says as far as he can fix the hour (speaking at this distance of time not very particularly, and no one can speak particularly as to time, unless his attention was called to it)-it was a quarter before six in the evening that he stopped at his door, the Warren House, on his way back, being then on horseback."


https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=umn.31951p00335898c&seq=7
https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Report_of_proceedings_under_commissions.html?id=iNxbAAAAQAAJ&redir_esc=y
Report of proceedings under commissions of Oyer & Terminer and Gaol Delivery, for the county of York, held at the castle of York before Sir Alexander Thomson ... and Sir Simon Le Blanc ... from the 2d to the 12th of January 1813. From the short hand notes of Mr. Gurney. To which are subjoined two proclamations, issued in consequence of the result of those proceedings

TO DO properly

pp65-71

*[Mr. Justice Le Blanc's Summing up.]*

On the part of the prisoners, they have called witnesses to shew that this account is not true, for that some or all of the prisoners were seen by different witnesses at places and times, where they could not have been, if they had been concerned in this transaction. You see, no proofs are given to explain any of those strong passages of the evidence, which I observed up onto you as I went over it, and those in part from persons connected with, one of the prisoners; but witnesses are produced, to shew that one or other of the prisoners, and all of them in some instances, were seen at such a time in the evening, that they could not have been at this plantation when the piece was fired off, by which Mr. Horsfall was shot. This must depend very much, not only on the credit given to those different witnesses who have been called, but certainly, at this distance of time, upon the accuracy of their recollection; and some of them, you will see clearly, according to the account given by the other witnesses, must be mainly mistaken as to time.

The first witness called, is William Hansard, who says he was at Huddersfield (where he lives) on the 28th of April last, the day on which Mr. Horsfall was shot; that he knows the prisoner George Mellor, to whom he particularly speaks; that he saw him about a quarter of a mile out of the town of Huddersfield at a little before seven o'clock in the evening; that he had heard of Mr. Horsfall's being shot, and that Mellor was passing as if going to Longroyd Bridge. I do not know Le Blanc's whether that is consistent with the date at which the firing appears clearly to have happened. It must have happened some short time after six o'clock, according to the account of the first witness, Armitage. As nearly as he can recollect, it was a quarter before six, when Mr. Horsfall stopped at his door, and he fixes the utmost time he stayed at twenty minutes, which would bring it to a quarter after six, and he had avery little way to go to the plantation before the shot was fired; so that it would probably be between a quarter after six and half past six, when the shot took place. This witness fixes it a little before seven, when he saw Mellor on the road, as if going to Longroyd Bridge. That comes very nearly to the time he was at Joseph Mellor's. The woman says he was there at a quarter after six o'clock; but clocks vary, and the memory of people varies as to time; and therefore one cannot try very correctly by that test, unless one has something more than the mere recollection of persons. However, he says that a little before seven he met George Mellor upon the road, going to Longroyd Bridge.

Jonathan Womersley, a clock-maker at Huddersfield, says that he saw George Mellor on the evening on which Mr. Horsfall was shot, about six o'clock, or a quarter or ten minutes after, at the corner of the Cloth-Hall-street in Huddersfield; that they went to Mr. Taverner's, to settle a little account, where they had one pint, and then a second; be stopped till he got his money, and then he left Mellor there, and then he went to the Brown Cow in the market-place, and the soldiers were then riding over the market-place, full speed.

I suppose, upon the alarm of this person having been shot, the soldiers had been ordered out; that has not been proved, but I suppose that is what is to be understood. He says that he saw him about six, or a little after that time. According to the account of his cousin, he was at Dungeon Bottom at a quarter after six. They may all think that they speak accurately, but still it shews the little reliance which can be placed upon evidence as to particular times, when you come to be bringing several transactions within the space of pretty nearly an hour. Mrs. Mellor says that they stopped a quarter of an hour; so that according to her account, Mellor did not leave her house till half after six.

The next witness is William Battersley, a shoemaker, who was at Huddersfield and at Taverner's at the time the other man speaks to; he confirms his account, that they had two pints of beer, and that they remained in company till they had drank it, and he thinks they stayed half an hour at Taverner's, it might be more or less. That does not carry it further as to time, only that he was there with Womersley. The only Mr Justice question is, whether it was sooner or later.

John Thorpe says, he lives at Castle Gate in Huddersfield; that he knows George Mellor; that he remembers, the day Mr. Horsfall was shot, that he met George Mellor opposite the George Inn in Huddersfield, about ten minutes before six o'clock; (that is carrying it, you see, very early); that he stopped in the street with him a few minutes; he says he knows it wanted ten minutes of six, for that he had a watch he wanted to sell him, and he asked him if he would buy it; that he took the watch out, and that that makes him know it was ten minutes before six o'clock. That is not reconcileable at all with the account given by the cousin, but by supposing that the clocks or watches vary very much, or that the memories of the people vary very much.

Jonathan Battersley, a shoemaker at Huddersfield, says he saw Mr. Horsfall on the evening when he was shot; that he went up the street towards the Market-place, a little after five o'clock; that he(the witness) then went into his own house, 'that he drank tea, and then he put on his coat, and went up the street about a quarter of an hour after Mr. Horsfall had got on horseback (that would be about half after five o'clock); that he went across the Market-place leading to New-street, where he met George Mellor, coming towards the George Inn; that they passed a few words, and were not above a minute or two together at the furthest; that he went home; that it was not quite six o'clock, when he left George Mellor, and he did not hear of Mr. Horsfall's being shot till after he had got home. Still these all fix him to have been in Huddersfield at a time not at all consistent with the account given by Mrs. Mellor of his being at Dungeon Wood.

George Armitage, who is a blacksmith at Lockwood, says, that his shop is between Joseph Mellor's house and the town of Huddersfield; that he was in his shop between five and six, and that he saw George Mellor come past, but he cannot say within a few minutes as to time; that he had not been at his drinking that evening, that they generally drank between five and half after five, but that he had been shoeing a horse, and perhaps it might delay him; that when he saw George Mellor pass, he was coming as if from Joseph Mellor's, and going towards Huddersfield. Now between this man and Joseph Mellor's wife, there must be a mistake; because she says, according to her account, he did not leave her house till half after six, and this man says he came past his shop between five and six. He says he has known George Mellor sometime, and that he never heard any thing against his character'; that the account he gave was, that he had been at Joseph Mellor's, with a man that wanted work." To be sure, either Joseph Mellor's wife, or this man, must have erred very Le Blanc's much in the time. They were not aware, perhaps, of each other's evidence.

Joseph Armitage, a brother of the last witness, says, that he saw George Mellor, on the day on which Mr. Horsfall was shot, at the shop-door of his brother; that his mother came to call them in to their drinking, and that he went to the door, and saw his brother talking with George Mellor. He does not fix the time, only that it was after his mother had called them in.

The next witness speaks particularly with respect to the prisoner *Thorpe*. Charles Ratcliffe states, that he is a clothdresser at Huddersfield; that he remembers the night Mr. Horsfall was shot at; that he was at Mr. Fisher's, at Longroyd Bridge; that he went there at half past five o'clock that evening; that he went into a room at Mr. Fisher's, called - the raising-shop, and that he saw *Thorpe* there raising a blue coat cloth, that he had a conversation with him for a quarter of an hour, and left him there when he came away; that there was a young woman fetching water out of the cistern in the shop, in a can; that he returned to Huddersfield immediately, and that when he got there, it was about a quarter or twenty minutes after six by the Cloth Hall clock; and that half an hour after that he heard of Mr. Horsfall being shot. So that, according to his account, he saw *Thorpe* in the raising-shop at half past five o'clock that evening, and he stayed there nearly a quarter of an hour, which would bring it to nearly a quarter before six, with the variation of clocks. I apprehend a very little time would be necessary to go from Longroyd Bridge to the plantation. Still, if they are accurate in speaking, by the same clocks, the account appears inconsistent; but, accounting for the difference by the difference in clocks and memories, I do not think it is so very striking. Ratcliffe states, that *Thorpe* was the only man at that time who was at work in the shop.

Frances Midwood, a young woman living with her father at Longroyd Bridge, states, that she recollects the 28th of April; that they were to wash the next day, and she was fetching water from the raising-shop of Mr. Fisher, for washing the next day; that she began going about five o'clock, that the first time she went there was nobody there; that when she went about ten minutes after five, William Thorpe was there, and again the third time William Thorpe was there, talking with another man, but she did not know who he was; that she went repeatedly, and continued going until she heard some report about Mr. Horsfall being shot; and that then she did not fetch any more water, but that every time she went to the raising-shop, after the first, she saw Thorpe there; and that one of the times when she was there she saw Abraham Pilling, Mr. Justice who had been making her a pair of shoes, and had followed Le Blanc's her to the shop, which he saw her go into.

Then Abraham Pilling is called, who is a shoemaker in Huddersfield. He says, that he had made a pair of shoes for the last witness, Frances Midwood; that he delivered a pair of shoes to her on the night Mr. Horsfall was shot; that he was going to her father's with them, and saw her crossing the road with a can, that he followed her into the raising- house, where he found her and William Thorpe; that she was lading water out of a cistern with a can; that it wanted a quarter to six when he set out from home, and Longroyd Bridge to is better than a mile from his house. So that, according his account, it must have been past six o'clock probably before he got there. He says that Fanny Midwood took the money shoes, and asked him what was to pay, and she went to fetch to pay him; and in the mean time he talked with Thorpe, and then she came back with a note. He stayed a little while longer, and then he went forward a mile another way, where he was going: and that as he was going out of the raising-house, the neighbours told him that Mr. Horsfall had been shot.

John Bower, who is apprentice at John Wood's at Longroyd Bridge, says, that the day when Mr. Horsfall was shot, he saw George Mellor on Mr. Wood's premises; that they were hard-pressing, that George Mellor was assisting him at the hardening of the press; that Thomas Smith, Benjamin Walker, James Varley, and John Walker, were there assisting, and that the time when they were so doing was somewhere near seven o'clock in the evening; that they stripped up their shirt-sleeves to work; and that he saw the prisoner Smith go to his drinking about six o'clock; that he had seen him a good many times at work between noon and six o'clock; that he went into his drinking about six; that he was at work in a different room from *Smith*, but that he went into the room where Smith was, to fetch the pieces for the press; that he slept in the same room with Mellor the night Mr. Horsfall was shot, and Thomas Smith slept in the same room; that William Hall had a house of his own, but he cannot recollect whether he slept in the same room that night or not. William Hall says that he did. The boy then gives an account of a transaction, that he saw the Widow Hartley come down the yard about seven that evening, and that she first brought the account of what had happened to Mr. Horsfall, and that he and  William Hall were then in the press-room; brought the news of Mr. Horsfall's accident before Mellor and the others came to harden. Now he does not speak to having seen them come to harden till after the news was brought. He fixes it about seven o'clock; how much later it was, he does not say precisely, but that it was about seven. It could not be, consistently with the others, unless it was some time after. He says he had been to call them before, she came, that it was a particularly busy day, and they did not go to their drinking till six o'clock; that he had not seen *George Mellor* there, from three in the afternoon, till they came to harden. You have the account as to *George Mellor*, where he was apart of the time, from those who knew him well; that he was at his cousin's short of seven o'clock, and somebody with him, whom the apprentice believes to have been *Thorpe*.

Then Mary Thorpe, a servant to Mr.Wood, says, that on the 28th of April she saw *Smith* and Bower coming in at the kitchen door, they came in at six o'clock to have some drink, that it struck six as they came in; that Mr.Wood's clock is kept pretty accurately by the Cloth Hall clock; that she supplies the men who live in the house, every day, with beer; that John Bower, *Thomas Smith*, *George Mellor*, and William Hall,live in the house; and she states this circumstance, that *Smith* has a very good knack at whistling.

The last witness called, is a man of the name of William Hirst, who lives at Longroyd Bridge, and lodges in the house of Mr. Wood, with whom most of these men work and many of them lodge. He says he knew Benjamin Walker, that is, the accomplice; that he remembers the day when Mr. Horsfall was shot, that he was at Mr. Wood's house that evening, that he went down the yard about seven o'clock, and that he met Benjamin Walker there. He says he had heard of Mr.Horsfall being shot, before he left Huddersfield; and that his son is a merchant living at Huddersfield, who employs Mr. Wood as he does other persons, to do his work.

This, Gentlemen, is the evidence produced on the part of the prisoners, evidence of different persons coming in at different times, for the purpose of shewing that, at points of time in that evening which they fix, they saw either all the prisoners, or some of them, in situations not consistent with the time allotted by the account given by the other witnesses for this transaction. When you see the point of time at which it took place, and the nearness of all the different spots where they were to the place in question, perhaps it is not so surprising that there should at such a distance of time be so much variance in the account given by different witnesses, as to the periods of the day, as there appears to be upon the present occasion. Even supposing the witnesses to come under no improper bias or influence in what they are saying; they are speaking of a transaction, which not only took place a long time ago, but was not imputed to the prisoners at the bar till a considerable time after it had taken place. For this took  place in the month of April, and it does not appear that enquiry was made before the magistrate, or any of these persons committed, till the month of October. Nothing happened immediately after the transaction, to lead these persons particularly to watch, so as to be accurate in the hour or time on that particular evening when they saw these persons at a particular place; and we know how apt persons are to be mistaken, even when care is taken, in point of time. However, Gentlemen, it is for you to compare the evidence. The evidence on the part of the prosecution rests, not on the testimony of Benjamin Walker only, but of several other workmen in this manufactory, who are not accomplices in this transaction, though they appear to have had a knowledge of it, which I cannot say is not to a certain degree guilty. For I cannot hold them innocent in knowing of such a transaction going on, and treating it so lightly as to give no information respecting it, and to keep it concealed longer than while there was an immediate impression of fear of personal danger to themselves. But, independently of this, you have evidence of that, which appears to me to be the strongest part of the case, and to require the most explanation, but which has not been explained, and which applies particularly to the prisoner Mellor, and to Thorpe, if you are satisfied he was with Mellor : I mean, the transaction which took place at Joseph Mellor's house at Dungeon,Wood, and which goes to contradict, in point of time, the evidence given by the different witnesses on the part of the defendants. The enquiry is a serious one, not only as it regards the prisoners themselves, but as it regards the public peace and security. You, who have heard the evidence, will lay the facts together in prisoners your minds, and will do justice between the country and the prisoners.

The Jury retired at half past seven, and returned at five minutes before eight, finding

George Mellor - - - *Guilty.*  
William Thorpe - - - *Guilty.*  
Thomas Smith - - - *Guilty.*

The prisoners being severally asked in the usual manner, by the Clerk of Arraigns, if they had any thing to say, why answered sentence of Death should not be pronounced upon them? answered
,
Mellor— I have nothing to say, only I am not guilty.  
Thorpe— I am not guilty, Sir; evidence has been given false against me; that I declare.  
Smith— Not guilty, Sir.


https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=07tNAQAAMAAJ&pg=PA9&dq=cowgill+luddites&hl=en&newbks=1&newbks_redir=0&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwi06NzS9d-OAxVrVUEAHQYOHikQ6AF6BAgHEAM#v=onepage&q=cowgill%20luddites&f=false
An Historical Account of the Luddites of 1811, 1812, and 1813: With Report (Cowgill ) 1862

pp40-4  

THE DEFENCE.

The evidence for the prosecution being gone through Mr. Justice Le Blanc said, "This is the time, prisoners, to make your defence. Would you, George Mellor, Wm. Thorpe, and Thomas Smith, wish to say anything for yourselves?"

PRISONERS. "We leave it to our Counsel."

WM. HANSON, the first witness called on behalf of the prisoners, said, that he was at Huddersfield on the 28th of April, saw Mellor about a quarter of a mile from Huddersfield, going to Longroyd Bridge about a quarter before seven.

JOHN WOMERSLEY, is a clock and watch-maker, saw Mellor on the evening Mr. Horsfall was shot, at a quarter after six in Huddersfield, at the corner of the Cloth-Hall street, had a note in his pocket for him, he owing him 7s. for business done, went with him to Mr. Tavenor's, the White Hart near the Cloth-Hall, and stopped in the house about twenty minutes, where he drank with the prisoner Mellor, and left him there with one Wm. Battersby. Witness went then to the Brown Cow, another public-house, and he had no sooner got in than the news arrived that Mr. Horsfall was shot, and the soldiers were going.

Cross-examined by Mr. Park-had just time to go to the Brown Cow after he left the prisoner at Tavenor's, it was about twenty minutes to seven o'clock, the prisoner paid him the 7s. and he could produce the note, had no particular acquaintance with him, but had done work for his father for many years. From Longroyd Bridge to Huddersfield is about a quarter of a mile. Re-examined: Crosland-moor is more than twice as far from Huddersfield as Longroyd Bridge.

WM. BATTERSBY, the next witness, lived then at Taylor-Hill, was at Huddersfield on the 28th of April; and recollects that
evening by being at Tavenor's, saw George Mellor and Jonathan Womersley, and drank with them; they had two pints of ale, and Jonathan Womersley left him in company with George Mellor, they were at this inn half-an-hour. At the end of that time they heard of Mr. Horsfall being shot for the first time. They came out and he parted with Mellor at the door.

JOHN THORPE, lives in Castle street, Huddersfield; has known Mellor 16 or 17 years, saw Mellor in Huddersfield near the George Inn, on the evening Horsfall was shot, at ten minutes before six, witness had a watch which he wanted to sell him, and stopped with him two or three minutes; he asked him if he would buy his watch, and produced it, when it appeared to be the time he mentioned.

Cross-examined by Mr. Topping-does not know what street in Huddersfield the George Inn is in; says it wanted just ten minutes to six by his watch; Mellor examined the inside, and asked him the price of the watch; witness valued it at £3 13s. but he did not buy it.

JONATHAN BATTERSBY, a shoemaker, remembers the evening Mr. Horsfall was shot; he saw Mr. Horsfall that evening in his father's yard; he was on horseback, and went in the direction homeward; it was between five and six o'clock; he went into his own house, stopped till he got his tea, and then put on his coat, and went up street, this was about twenty minutes after he had seen Mr. Horsfall ride up. He saw Mellor in the New-street, and conversed with him a minute or two. It was not quite six o'clock when he parted with the prisoner at the bar, he then went home, and heard of the shooting of Mr. Horsfall, as soon as he got home.

GEORGE ARMITAGE, blacksmith, living at Lockwood, knows where Joseph Mellor lives, his house is between the Dungeon and Huddersfield, saw George Mellor come past between five and six o'clock, they go to their drinking sometimes at five, and sometimes at half-past. That evening he had been detained by a job till after five o'clock; had some conversation with the prisoner; observed that he was coming from the bar, and going towards Huddersfield. He said he was coming from Joseph Mellor's.

Cross-examined by Mr. Park-Mellor said he had been at Joseph Mellor's, with a man that wanted work.

JOSEPH ARMITAGE, saw Mr. Horsfall at his shop door, going towards Huddersfield from Lockwood Bar, saw his brother talking with George Mellor at drinking time, between five and six o'clock.

CHARLES RATCLIFFE, cloth-dresser, of Huddersfield was at Mr. Fisher's of Longroyd Bridge, on the afternoon of the day of Mr. Horsfall's murder, seeking work; was in the raising shop at half-past five; knows Thorpe, and saw him raising a blue coat piece, in that room; he conversed with him for a quarter of an hour, or upwards; left him there, and there was a young woman fetching water in a can, out of the raising shop. He returned to Huddersfield, where he arrived twenty minutes after six, by the Cloth Hall clock: about half-an-hour after, he heard of Mr. Horsfall being shot at.

Cross-examined by Mr. Topping-he was in search of work, did not see Mr. Fisher; Thorpe was the only man he saw, or conversed with there.

FRANCES MIDWOOD, of Longroyd Bridge, keeps her father's house, and says, that on the 28th of April, as their usual practice is, they drank tea about half-past four o'clock. The next day was their washing-day, and they got water from Mr. Fisher's shop. About five o'clock, just after tea, she went with a can to fetch water from that shop-The first time she went there was nobody in the shop; it requires about ten minutes to go, and she returned immediately, and then she saw William Thorpe. He asked her if she was fetching water, and she said "Yes." Went the third time some other person was with him.

She continued fetching water for some time, but desisted on hearing of Mr. Horsfall's murder; heard of it between six a seven o'clock, but she does not exactly know what time. Saw W. Thorpe every time she went for water except the first. One of the times she saw Abraham Pilling, a shoemaker, who was bringing her a pair of new shoes. He followed her into the raising shop and she left him with Thorpe.

Cross-examined by Mr. Park-she does not know how long it takes to go from Joseph Mellor's to Fisher's, nor does she recollect when she was first asked at what hour they drank tea on the 28th of April; it was not within these few days. When she was asked it was in the presence of Mr. Blackburn, the prisoner's attorney. A person fetched her to Mr. Blackburn's, but that person did not put the question to her; she first told them, it was soon after the prisoners came to York, but she cannot recollect the exact time.

ABRAHAM PILLING, shoemaker, made the last witness shoes and delivered them on the night the murder was committed; he took them from Huddersfield, to her father's, and he saw her crossing the road with a can in her hand. He followed her to the door which goes into the raising house, found Fanny Midwood, and Wm. Thorpe there, she was laiding water out of a cistern with a can. He waited till she had done. It was a quarter to six when he set off from home, and his house is a mile from Longroyd Bridge. She asked the price of the shoes, and went and fetched a guinea note belonging to Ingham's bank. He stopped in the place, and had some discourse with Thorpe. He continued in the place about half-an-hour, when he set out for the Marsh, which is nearly another mile on the Lindley road, but when he came out of the raising shop and had just got into the lane, he was told that Mr. Horsfall was shot.

JOHN BOWER, a boy, about seventeen, apprentice to Mr. Wood, of Longroyd Bridge, examined by Mr. Williams-said, Mellor superintends the work for Mr. Wood; recollects the day Mr. Horsfall was shot at; saw Mellor that day in the afternoon; they were pressing. The press was to harden and Mellor assisted at the harding of the press; there were Thomas Smith, Benjamin Walker, James Varley and John Walker; it was near seven o'clock; is quite sure Benjamin Walker and Smith were present at the harding of the press; Smith, the prisoner, was an apprentice. William Hall and he slept in the same room.

W. HALL says: Widow Hartley brought this news about go to drinking till six o'clock, and soon after they heard that Mr. Horsfall was shot.

WILLIAM HIRST, of Longroyd Bridge, has lodged at Mr. Wood's some years; remembers Benjamin Walker, remembers the time when Mr. Horsfall was shot, there was noise enough about that; when he first heard of it, he said to Benjamin Walker-"Horsfall is shot!"-and Walker replied "That is too good news to be true."

It was objected by the Counsel for the Crown, that what Walker said was not evidence, and ought not to be received, and in that objection his Lordship concurred. William Hirst in continuation said, he had been at Huddersfield that day, and left it at about twenty minutes before seven o'clock.

Cross-examined by Mr. Topping-he was no relation to any of the prisoners; his son is a merchant in Huddersfield, and employs Mr. Wood, as well as many other people. On being asked what he meant by saying that there was noise enough about the murder of Mr. Horsfall? he said all he meant was, that it was a very bad thing, and produced a great outcry.

JOSEPH RUSHWORTH, the last witness called, said, he lived at the bottom of Cowcliff, that he knows William Hall, who has been examined here to-day, remembers him being before Mr. Radcliffe on the 12th of October; Hall was coming to Mr. Radcliffe's when he saw him, but had no conversation with him after he had been before the Magistrate.


pp.56- [Judge sum-up prosecution wrt times]

The next witness called, is a man of the name of William Hall. ...  that on that day George Mellor applied to him for a Russian pistol, about four or five in the afternoon ...

The next witness is Joseph Sowden, who says he is a crop- per in Wood's shop; that he saw all the three prisoners the day Mr. Horsfall was shot; that at about half-past four, or between that and five, he saw Thorpe and Mellor enter the shop, while he was getting some refreshment, with each a pistol in his hand; ...

...

... they first call Martha Mellor, who says that her husband, Joseph Mellor, is the cousin of the prisoner George Mellor; that she and her husband live at Dungeon, about two hundred yards from Dungeon Wood; ... that on the same evening on which she heard afterwards that Mr. Horsfall had been shot, she saw the prisoner at the bar, George Mellor, about a quarter after six, when he came to her house with another person whom she did not know ... [Mellor] asked if they wanted a man to work ...They stopped there about a quarter of an hour. George Mellor asked her to lend him a coat; ... They stopped there about a quarter of an hour. ... She says, she thinks it was a quarter-past six o'clock when they came, for she guessed they had been gone about half an hour before her husband came home; and she thinks he came home about seven o'clock.

... the account of the apprentices. ... George Mellor came in, and a man with him, who, he thinks, was like Thorpe ... George Mellor gave the apprentice two pistols. ...

... the time when his master came home was an hour, or an hour and a half, after these men had been at the house.

pp. 68-75 [Judge's summing up]

On the part of the prisoners, they have called witnesses to shew that this account is not true, for that some or all of the prisoners were seen by different witnesses at places and times, where they could not have been, if they had been concerned in this transaction. You see, no proofs are given to explain any of those strong passages of the evidence, which I observed upon to you as I went over it, and those in part from persons connected with one of the prisoners ; but witnesses are produced, to shew that one or other of the prisoners, and all of them in some instances, were seen at such a time in the evening, that they could not have been at this plantation when the piece was fired off, by which Mr. Horsfall was shot. This must depend very much, not only on the credit given to those different witnesses who have been called, but certainly, at this distance of time, upon the accuracy of their recollection; and some of them, you will see clearly, according to the account given by the other witnesses, must be mainly mistaken as to time.

The first witness called, is William Hansard, who says he was at Huddersfield (where he lives) on the 28th of April last, the day on which Mr. Horsfall was shot; that he knows the prisoner George Mellor, to whom he particularly speaks; that he saw him about a quarter of a mile out of the town of Huddersfield at a little before seven o'clock in the evening; that he had heard of Mr. Horsfall's being shot, and that Mellor was passing as if going to Longroyd Bridge. I do not know whether that is consistent with the date at which the firing appears clearly to have happened. It must have happened some short time after six o'clock, according to the account of the first witness, Armitage. As nearly as he can recollect, it was a quarter before six, when Mr. Horsfall stopped at his door, and he fixes the utmost time he stayed at twenty minutes, which would bring it to a quarter after six, and he had a very little way to go to the plantation before the shot was fire ; so that it would probably be between a quarter after six and half-past six, when the shot took place. This witness fixes it a little before seven, when he saw Mellor on the road, as if going to Longroyd Bridge. That comes very nearly to the time he was at Joseph Mellor's. The woman says he was there at a quarter after six o'clock; but clocks vary, and the memory of people varies as to time; and therefore one cannot try very correctly by that test, unless one has something more than the mere recollection of persons. However, he says that a little before seven he met George Mellor upon the road, going to Longroyd Bridge.

Jonathan Womersley, a clock-maker at Huddersfield, says that he saw George Mellor on the evening on which Mr. Horsfall was shot, about six o'clock or a quarter or ten minutes after, at the corner of the Cloth-Hall-street in Huddersfield; that they went to Mr. Tavenor's, to settle a little account, where they had one pint, and then a second; he stopped till he got his money, and then he left Mellor there, and then he went to the Brown Cow in the market-place, and the soldiers were then riding over the market-place, full speed. I suppose, upon the alarm of this person having been shot, the soldiers had been ordered out; that has not been proved, but I suppose that is what is to be understood. He says that he saw him about six, or a little after that time. According to the account of his cousin, he was at Dungeon Bottom at a quarter after six. They may all think that they speak accurately, but still it shews the little reliance which can be placed upon evidence as to particular times, when you come to be bringing several transactions within the space of pretty nearly an hour. Mrs. Mellor says that they stopped a quarter of an hour; so that according to her account, Mellor did not leave her house till half after six.

The next witness is William Battersby, a shoemaker, who was at Huddersfield and at Tavenor's at the time the other man speaks to; he confirms his account, that they had two pints of beer, and that they remained in company till they had drank it, and he thinks they stayed half-an-hour at Tavenor's, it might be more or less. That does not carry it further as to time, only that he was there with Womersley. The only question is, whether it was sooner or later.

John Thorpe says, he lives at Castle-street in Huddersfield, that he knows George Mellor; that he remembers, the day Mr. Horsfall was shot, that he met George Mellor opposite the George Inn in Huddersfield, about ten minutes before six o'clock; (that is carrying it, you see, very early); that he stopped in the street with him a few minutes; he says he knows it wanted ten minutes of six, for that he had a watch he wanted to sell him, and he asked him if he would buy it; that he took the watch out, and that that makes him know it was ten minutes before six o'clock. That is not reconcileable at all with the account given by the cousin, but by supposing that the clocks or watches vary very much, or that the memories of the people vary very much.

Jonathan Battersby, a shoemaker in Huddersfield, says he saw Mr. Horsfall on the evening when he was shot; that he went up the street towards the Market-place, a little after five o'clock; that he (the witness) then went into his own house, that he drank tea, and then he put on his coat, and went up the street about a quarter of an hour after Mr. Horsfall had got on horseback (that would be about half after five o'olock); that he went across the Market-place leading to New-street, where he met George Mellor coming towards the George Inn; that they passed a few words, and were not above a minute or two together at the furthest; that he went home; that it was not quite six o'clock, when he left George Mellor, and he did not hear of Mr. Horsfall's being shot till after he had got home. Still these all fix him to have been in Huddersfield at atime not at all consistent with the account given by Mrs. Mellor of his being at Dungeon Wood.

George Armitage, who is a blacksmith at Lockwood, says, that his shop is between Joseph Mellor's house and the town of Huddersfield; that he was in his shop between five and six, and that he saw George Mellor come past, but he cannot say within a few minutes as to time; that he had not been at his drinking that evening, that they generally drank between five and half after five, but that he had been shoeing a horse, and perhaps it might delay him; that when he saw George Mellor pass, he was coming as if from Joseph Mellor's, and going towards Huddersfield. Now between this man and Joseph Mellor's wife, there must be a mistake; because she says, according to her account, he did not leave her house till half after six, and this man says he came past his shop between five and six. He says he has known George Mellor sometime, and that he never heard anything against his character; that the account he gave was, that he had been at Joseph Mellor's,
with a man that wanted work. To be sure, either Joseph Mellor's wife, or this man, must have erred very much in the time. They were not aware, perhaps, of each other's evidence.

Joseph Armitage, a brother of the last witness, says, that he saw George Mellor, on the day on which Mr. Horsfall was shot, at the shop-door of his brother; that his mother came to call them into their drinking, and that he went to the door, and saw his brother talking with George Mellor. He does not fix the time, only that it was after his mother had called them in.

The next witness speaks particularly with respect to the prisoner Thorpe. Charles Ratcliffe states, that he is a cloth-dresser at Huddersfield; that he remembers the night Mr. Horsfall was shot at; that he was at Mr. Fisher's, at Longroyd Bridge; that he went there at half-past five o'clock that evening; that he went into a room at Mr. Fisher's, called the raising-shop, and that he saw Thorpe there raising a blue coat cloth, that he had a conversation with him for a quarter of an hour, and left him there when he came away; that there was a young woman fetching water out of the cistern in the shop, in a can; that he returned to Huddersfield immediately, and that when he got there, it was about a quarter or twenty minutes after six by the Cloth Hall clock; and that half-an-hour after that he heard of Mr. Horsfall being shot. So that, according to his account, he saw Thorpe in the raising-shop at half-past five o'clock that evening, and he stayed there nearly a quarter of an hour, which would bring it to nearly a quarter before six, with the variation of clocks. I apprehend a very little time would be necessary to go from Longroyd Bridge to the plantation. Still, if they are accurate in speaking, by the same clocks, the account appears inconsistent;but, accounting for the difference by the difference in clocks and memories, I do not think it is so very striking. Ratcliffe states, that Thorpe was the only man at that time who was at work in the shop.

Frances Midwood, a young woman living with her father at Longroyd Bridge, states, that she recollects the 28th of April; that they were to wash the next day, and she was fetching water from the raising-shop of Mr. Fisher, for washing the next day; that she began going about five o'clock, that the first time she went there was nobody there; that when she went about ten minutes after five, William Thorpe was there, and again the third time William Thorpe was there, talking with another man, but she did not know who he was; that she went repeatedly, and continued going until she heard some report about Mr. Horsfall being shot; and that then she did not fetch any more water, but that every time she went to the raising-shop, after the first, she saw Thorpe there; and that oneof the times when she was there she saw Abraham Pilling, who had been making her a pair of shoes, and had followed her to the shop, which he saw her go into.

Then Abraham Pilling is called, who is a shoemaker in Huddersfield. He says, that he had made a pair of shoes for the last witness, Frances Midwood; that he delivered a pair of shoes to her on the night Mr. Horsfall was shot; that he was going to her father's with them, and saw her crossing the road with a can, that he followed her into the raising-house, where he found her and William Thorpe; that she was lading water out of a cistern with a can; that it wanted a quarter to six when he set out from home, and Longroyd Bridge is better than a mile from his house. So that according to his account, it must have been past six o'clock probably before he got there. He says that Frances Midwood took the shoes, and asked him what was to pay, and she went to fetch money to pay him; and in the meantime he talked with Thorpe, and then she came back with a note. He stayed a little while longer, and then he went forward a mile another way, where he was going: and that as he was going out of the raising-house, the neighbours told him that Mr. Horsfall had been shot.

John Bower, who is apprentice at John Wood's at Longroyd Bridge, says, that the day when Mr. Horsfall was shot, he saw George Mellor on Mr. Wood's premises; that they were hard-pressing, that George Mellor was assisting him at the hardening of the press; that Thomas Smith, Benjamin Walker, James Varley, and John Walker, were there assisting, and that the time when they were so doing was somewhere near seven o'clock in the evening; that they stripped up their shirt- sleeves to work; and that he saw the prisoner Smith go to his drinking about six o'clock; that he had seen him a good many times at work between noon and six o'clock; that he went in to his drinking about six ; that he was at work in a different room from Smith, but that he went into the room where Smith was, to fetch the pieces for the press ; that he slept in the same room with Mellor the night Mr. Horsfall was shot, and Thomas Smith slept in the same room; that William Hall had a house of his own, but he cannot recollect whether he slept in the same room that night or not. William Hall says that he did. The boy then gives an account of a transaction, that he saw the Widow Hartley come down the yard about seven that evening, and that she first brought the account of what had happened to Mr. Horsfall, and that he and William Hall were then in the press-room ; that she brought the news of Mr. Horsfall's accident before Mellor and the others came to harden. Now he does not speak to having seen them come to harden till after the news was brought. He fixes it about seven o'clock ; how much later it was, he does not say precisely, but that it was about seven. It could not be, consistently with the others, unless it was some time after. He says he had been to call them before she came, that it was a particularly busy day, and they did not go to their drinking till six o'clock; that he had not seen George Mellor there, from three in the afternoon, till they came to harden. You have the account as to George Mellor, where he was a part of the time, from those who knew him well; that he was at his cousin's short of seven o'clock, and somebody with him, whom the apprentice believes, to have been Thorpe.

Then Mary Thorpe, a servant to Mr. Wood, says, that on the 28th of April she saw Smith and Bower coming in at the kitchen door; they came in at six o'clock to have some drink; that it struck six as they came in; that Mr. Wood's clock is kept pretty accurately by the Cloth-hall clock; that she supplies the men who live in the house, every day, with beer; that John Bower, Thomas Smith, George Mellor, and William Hall, live in the house; and she states this circumstance, that Smith
has a very good knack at whistling.

The last witness called, is a man of the name of William Hirst, who lives at Longroyd Bridge, and lodges in the house of Mr. Wood, with whom most of these men work and many of them lodge. He says he knew Benjamin Walker, that is the accomplice; that he remembers the day when Mr. Horsfall was shot; that he was at Mr. Wood's house that evening; that he went down the yard about seven o'clock, and that he met Benjamin Walker there. He says he had heard of Mr. Horsfall being shot before he left Huddersfield; and that his son is a merchant living at Huddersfield, who employs Mr. Wood as he does other persons, to do his work.

This, gentlemen, is the evidence produced on the part of the prisoners; evidence of different persons coming in at different times, for the purpose of shewing that, at points of time in that evening which they fix, they saw either all the prisoners, or some of them, in situations not consistent with the time allotted by the account given by the other witness for this transaction. When you see the point of time at which it took place, and the nearness of all the different spots where they were to the place in question, perhaps it is not so surprising that there should at such a distance of time, be so much variance in the account given by different witnesses, as to the periods of the day, as there appears to be upon the present occasion. Even supposing the witnesses to come under no improper bias or influence in what they are saying, they are speaking of a transaction, which not only took place a long time ago, but was not imputed to the prisoners at the bar till a considerable time after it had taken place. For this took place in the month of April, and it does not appear that enquiry was made before the magistrate, or any of these persons committed, till the month of October. Nothing happened immediately after the transaction, to lead these persons particularly to watch, so as to be accurate in the hour or time on that particular evening, when they saw these persons at a particular place; and we know how apt persons are to be mistaken, even when care is taken, in point of time. However, gentlemen, it is for you to compare the evidence. The evidence on the part of the prosecution rests, not on the testimony of Benjamin Walker only, but of several other workmen in this manufactory, who are not accomplices in this transaction, though they appear to have had a knowledge of it, which I cannot say is not to a certain degree guilty. For I cannot hold them innocent in knowing of such a transaction going on, and treating it so lightly as to give no information was an immediate impression of fear of personal danger to themselves. But, independently of this, you have evidence of that which appears to me to be the strongest part of the case, and to require the most explanation, but which has not been explained, and which applies particularly to the prisoner Mellor, and to Thorpe, if you are satisfied he was with Mellor: I mean the transaction which took place at Joseph Mellor's house at Dungeon Wood, and which goes to contradict, in point of time, the evidence given by the different witnesses on the part of the defendants. The enquiry is a serious one, not only as it regards the prisoners themselves, but as it regards the public peace and security. You, who have heard the evidence, will lay the facts together in your minds, and will do justice between the country and the prisoners.
