# Special Commission — Attack on Rawfold Mill


https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Report_of_proceedings_under_commissions.html?id=iNxbAAAAQAAJ&redir_esc=y
Report of proceedings under commissions of oyer & terminer and gaol delivery, for the county of York ... before sir Alexander Thomson ... and sir Simon Le Blanc ... from the 2d to the 12th of January, 1813. From the short hand notes of mr. Gurney. To which are subjoined two proclamations issued in consequence of the result of those proceedings

This report appears to be the one then reprinted in Cobbett?

https://archive.org/details/cobbettscomplet14jardgoog/page/n554/mode/1up?q=rawfolds
Cobbett's complete collection of state trials and proceedings for high treason and other crimes and misdemeanors from the earliest period to the present time ... from the ninth year of the reign of King Henry, the Second, A.D. 1163, to ... [George IV, A.D. 1820]
by Thomas Bayly Howell , William Cobbett , David Jardine

Publication date ???

col. 1092-1123

Saturday , 9th January, 1813

THE KING

against

James Haigh, Jonathan Dean, John Ogden, James Brook, John Brook, Thomas Brook, John Walker, and John Hirst.

The eight prisoners (together with George Mellor, William Thorpe, and Thomas Smith, who were executed yesterday) were indicted; for that they, together with others unknown, were, on the 11th of April last, tumultuously assembled, and being so assembled did begin to demolish a certain mill of William Cartwright, at Liversedge, in the county of York.

The prisoners having been arraigned, and severally pleaded not guilty, the indictment was opened by Mr. Richardson.

*Mr. Park*.—May it please your lordships; gentlemen of the jury; we are now assembled to try a different species of offence, from either that of yesterday, or those of the preceding days. Gentlemen, this case it one of those, to which allusion has been made; it is connected with the system that has been prevailing in the country, and is one almost of the first of the desperate attacks that were made in this country, before that unfortunate event which deprived Mr. Horsfall of life. And you will find in the course of this, as indeed appeared in the course of that trial, that the irritation produced in the minds of the unfortunate persons who have suffered death for that offence, by what passed at Mr. Cartwright's mill, probably led to that lamentable event. The day that is material for your consideration here, is Saturday the eleventh of April 1812.

The act of parliament upon which the prisoners stand indicted, I will first state to you. It was passed in the 9th year of his present majesty's reign, cap. 29. intituled, "An Act for the more effectual punishment of such persons as shall demolish or pull down, burn, or otherwise destroy or spoil, any mill or mills." I need not trouble you with any further statement of the title of it. It goes on to enact, "That if any person or persons, unlawfully, riotously and tumultuously assembled together, to the disturbance of the public peace, shall unlawfully and with force demolish or pull down or begin to demolish or pull down any wind-saw-mill of other wind-mill, or any water-mill or other mill, which shall have been or shall be erected, or any of the works thereto respectively belonging, that then every such demolishing or pulling down, or beginning to demolish or pull down, shall be adjudged felony without benefit of clergy." This is the law upon which these men stand indicted.

It is well known, that in the manufacturing part of the West Riding of this county, there have been various implements of machine introduced, and wisely introduced, for the purpose of expediting our manufactures, and bringing them to better use. The advantages to the labourers themselves, if they would have given themselves the patience to understand the thing, would have convinced them of the great utility of such machinery; but unfortunately, they took a different course, and would not stay to consider the great mischiefs they would bring on themselves, not only if punishment followed, but the absolute poverty, misery and distress which the destruction of those mills, where such machinery was used, must bring on all the unfortunate persons who were occupied in them. If they had so considered, I think that common prudence independently of moral obligation, would have prevented their doing what has been done. For if only this devastation, which was intended for Mr. Cartwright's mill, had been effected, a number of families must have been thereby thrown out of bread, at least for a considerable time, till he could erect new works. It must, therefore, have produced dreadful distress. But that argument did not prevail with these misguided persons; and for a considerable period of time, these deluded, foolish, ignorant, and wicked men, were going round the country, destroying all the obnoxious machinery, and stealing arms; so that previously to the 11th of April, they had collected a considerable quantity of gunpowder, guns, pistols and other

Mr. Cartwright, whose mill, called Rawfolds mill, was so attacked on the 11th of April, had had previous notice, that among those people he had been denounced, on account of his employing the most improved machinery. In consequence of which notice, this gentleman slept in his mill for upwards of six weeks before the 11th of April, deserting his family (for his dwelling-house was elsewhere); and not only that, but he had beds prepared for five military, and four of his own workmen. He prepared for his defence, as every prudent man should do; and I have only to lament, that the same spirit Mr. Cartwright displayed, was not displayed by other gentlemen, whose property was threatened. Probably if that spirit had been manifested, their lordships and you would not have been troubled on the present occasion. I will not go through all that he did with his mill. It seemed almost impossible for any, but a most active military force, to destroy the works he erected there. But there is one thing I must mention, because it affords almost decisive evidence against one of the unfortunate men now at the bar. It seems the different floors (I think there were three above the ground floor) were laid with flags of a considerable size, in a row, which were raised obliquely, so as to make loopholes; so that if any man should attack the lower windows of the manufactory with hatchets and hammers, those within might fire down upon them; and Mr. Cartwright furnished himself with muskets and gunpowder for that purpose.

On the 11th of April (for I will now state the facts, applying them afterwards to the men at the bar): Mr. Cartwright will state that he had retired to bed soon after twelve, having previously ascertained that his watchmen were on their posts; two of whom were set on the outside, to give notice of the approach of an enemy; but, like many more of our watchmen, they were surprised, and were actually seized, before any alarm could be given by them. About twenty-five minutes before one, as well as he could ascertain the time, a large dog, which was chained on the ground floor, began to bark furiously. This gentleman, whose feelings were all alive, immediately jumped out of bed, and flew to the stairs; but while he was doing so, being still in his shirt, he was astonished by an immediate heavy fire of musketry poured into his upper windows, and violent hammering at the door next to the road; for you will find by the description, that this mill had a pond on one side, so that it was to a certain degree protected. Mr. Cartwright and his men had piled their arms the night before; he immediately rushed towards them, and met his own men and the soldiers, without any covering but their shirts, having just jumped out of bed. By his orders they commenced a heavy firing from within the mill, and this they continued, as will be proved to you, upwards of twenty minutes. The mob, during that time kept up their fire also; and you will find that it consisted of more than an hundred persons. They broke all the windows, many of the window frames, and one of the doors, calling out, with the most horrible imprecations (which I shall not repeat) "Bang up, lads!—Are you within, lads? —Damn them, keep close." Mr. Cartwright had placed an alarm bell at the top of his building; this was rung with considerable force, till the bell-rope broke. The mob, upon hearing it ring, called out, "Damn it, silence that bell." But two of Cartwright's men went up, and rang the bell, by turns firing and ringing. At length, the firing still continuing from within, and probably the ammunition of the mob running short, the assailants began to slacken fire, and at last it entirely ceased, except that one man fired a single shot at the close. Mr. Cartwright heard the people go off towards Huddersfield, and, when their clamour subsided, was able to hear the groans of some who were left behind wounded, but he was afraid of going out, lest it should be said that he had murdered them. It was so dark that nothing could be distinguished by sight. But when assistance came, Mr. Cartwright and his men went out, and found a great number of malls, hammers, muskets and so on, left on the road to Huddersfield. They also found two men, who were too badly wounded to escape, and who afterwards unfortunately died, upon whom the coroner's jury sat, and found a verdict (as they were bound to do) of justifiable homicide.

Now, gentlemen, the way in which I propose to fix the prisoners at the bar, some of them, is this. You will observe what extreme difficulty there must be in such a case as the present. Here is an attack made, at which no persons can of course be present, that are not themselves criminal, except the gentleman who is the object of attack; and he, from his situation, could not know any single individual who was present. I shall call before you no less than three of the persons who were at that attack; two of those three persons have already gone through the ordeal of an examination here; they have been examined, and with strict and proper strictness cross-examined by my learned friends, who were of counsel for those prisoners against whom they were called. I shall call before you also a person, who has likewise been examined before, not an accomplice, though not free from blame, because he did not communicate facts within his knowledge; a person of the name of Sowden. The general circumstances, to which Mr. Cartwright will speak, will be fully confirmed, or rather he will fully confirm the accomplices. I shall call before you this Sowden to confirm these men, who will prove, that a person of the name of Dickinson, who is not charged, for he has not been found, came to the manufactory of Mr. Wood. Mr. Wood's name has unfortunately been too often mentioned, and whether he knew more than has been discovered, God and his own conscience only know; but at Mr. Wood's house it seems wonderful that all these transactions should be going on, and the master of these men know nothing about them. But Sowden will prove, that on the morning of the 11th of April, Dickinson came to Mr. Wood's, and that at that time there was a great deal of conversation. He will tell you also that there was before that a great deal of conversation with John Walker and Jonathan Dean, two of the persons at the bar, about commencing the system of framebreaking, in the same way that the breaking of stocking and lace-frames had been carried on at Nottingham; when it was proposed, that these who would not join them, should be turned out of work; and that he was asked by Mellor and Dean to join them, but that he never did. He appears to me to be one of those fanatical enthusiasts one has seen about the country; but when he was before examined, I saw nothing in his manner to entitle any one to say he was not deserving of the credit he demands. This witness has also heard Dean mention that he was one of the party. He will prove also that Dickinson distributed ammunition, when he came to the manufactory on the morning of the day that this attack took place; and it will be proved to yon, that it was settled at that time where they were to meet; that they were to meet at about eleven o'clock at night, in a field belonging to sir George Armytage, near what ia called the dumb steeple, by which is meant an obelisk in sir George's grounds. It will be proved to you that there they went. That fact the accomplices of course will prove, for nobody else can. There they assembled; and one of the unfortunate persons now no more, George Mellor, seems to have been one of the most active leaders of the body. He appears to have acted as a kind of commander in chief. They were placed in military array; they were formed into companies, and marched in platoons, thirteen in front. How many rows there were, the witness cannot tell, from the darkness of the night. The men who had muskets, marched first; the pistol-men, next; and the club-men and staff-men, and those without fire-arms, marched in the third division; the musket-company commanded by Mellor; the pistol company by Thorpe; and by whom the third company was commanded, does not appear. They marched in this body to the mill, and they there made the attack which I have already mentioned to you, and which I shall not repeat; and they went off in the way I have already told you.

Now I must apply the rule of law which is admitted, and which the learned judges have stated to you, upon the subject of accomplices, the common cases of accomplices have been those, in which a crime has been committed by perhaps two or three or four men at the utmost, and where A. B. wishing to relieve himself, might be suspected of endeavouring to throw the guilt on an innocent man. But in this particular case, which, I thank God is, and I trust will be, the last instance of the kind, the body being extremely large, it is impossible to suppose that A. B. can fix on one, two, three, or even six, from such a motive, because that would not answer his purpose, as in the common case of a crime committed by a few. The rule of law laid down by one of their lordships, the other day, was that which every lawyer heard with entire satisfaction, and to which I have no doubt every lawyer will accede. It has been usual to confirm the accomplice in some of the transactions to which he speaks; he cannot be confirmed in the main transaction, because, if he was, we should not call him as a witness, but should put him upon his trial. What is expected, is, that we should confirm him in some of the minute particulars. It is not necessary, where an accomplice is called against a greater or a less number of persons, that he should be confirmed in the facts respecting every prisoner. Mr. Baron Thompson, in his charge to a jury on Tuesday, sitting in your place, stated the law most accurately. I have the Report `[see above, p. 17.]`, and I perfectly recollect it. "It is not necessary that an accomplice should be confirmed in every circumstance the details in evidence. That would he almost a matter of impossibility; that is certainly too much to be expected, and never is required. It is quite sufficient to see, that, in some material acts, the witness, who shall have been an accomplice, is confirmed to the satisfaction of a jury; and that confirmation need not be of circumstances which go to prove that he speaks truth with respect to all the prisoners, and with respect to the share they have each taken in the transaction; for if the jury are satisfied that he speaks truth in those parts, in which they see unimpeachable evidence brought to confirm him, that is a ground for them to believe that he speaks also truly with regard to the other prisoners, as to whom there may be no confirmation." His credit is to go to you; his credit stands or falls, not by the circumstance of his being confirmed as to all the men, to whom he is speaking; but if he is confirmed as to some of the men, and you find him speaking the truth as to some, and in some of the particulars, it is a fair ground for you to believe that he speaks truth as to the others.

The accomplices will speak to all the prisoners now standing at your bar. Now, therefore, taking that for granted, I will endeavour to shew you how I can confirm these accomplices as to some of them; for I state at once in the outset, that I cannot confirm them as to circumstances concerning all. But I have been extremely careful, as far as my judgment would enable me to go, and I hope that that care will not be made use of in any way against the conduct which has been pursued. Although I did not doubt about some of the other persons, who were to have been named in the indictment, I have not allowed any to be included, against whom all the accomplices did not speak, unless where there existed other circumstances of confirmation.

I will endeavour to go through the names of the prisoners in the indictment, excluding the three first, who are not here to answer for this offence. The case of James Haigh is one, respecting which I think there can be no doubt. I told you before, in the narration of the circumstances, that there was a firing. The next morning after this affair happened, James Haigh applied to a country surgeon, for a cure for a wound in the shoulder. The surgeon asked him his name. He would not tell him. The surgeon asked him, how he came by that hurt? and he said, he had received it by having fallen in jumping down a quarry. Now I apprehend that it had no appearance of being a wound such as a man would sustain by falling into a quarry, for it went in a slanting direction, and some of the linen of the shirt was carried into the wound. The surgeon dressed it as well as he could, he sewed it up, and he gave the prisoner some salve to dress it; and Haigh went away. You will find that he never appeared at his work again, but slipped away in the night, with his master, a man of the name of Ardron (whom he can call, if he chooses) to the house of a person of the name of Culpan, thirteen miles off; they arrived at Culpan's in the dead of night, and knocked up Culpan and his wife between three and four in the morning. Culpan has but one room, and one bed for himself and his wife; and Ardron told him, "This is a poor man, a friend of mine, he wants to rest a bit,— he has had an accident with his shoulder. I wish you would let him sit here." The poor man said it was very awkward, they had but one bed; however, he and his wife got up, and gave that bed to Haigh. The prisoner afterwards went from place to place for many days, and did not return to his work; and when he was apprehended, the shirt he had on was taken off, and the magistrate kept the shirt, which will be produced to you; and, I understand, from the hole it will appear most manifestly that the wound was received in the way I have stated.

With respect to the next prisoner Jonathan Dean, I shall prove to you that he was wounded in the hand; and I shall call Sowden, who will prove that Dean was one of the persons who declared at Wood's shop, when talking about shear-breaking, that he who would not join, should be turned out of work; and that he has heard Dean admit that he was at Cartwright's attack, and received the wound in his hand through the door, while he was in the act of striking it with a hatchet. The accomplices will prove that he was wounded in the hand, and here is an admission by the man that he received that wound there; and I think it will be proved to you, independently of this,  that Dean was continually using persuasions to others to induce them to become of the same party. But in order to put that, of which we have had too much experience under the present commission, entirely out of the question, I shall read to you the examination of Dean himself, which I apprehend will be quite decisive, and that it will be your duty to find him guilty.

The next person named in the indictment is John Ogden. With respect to him the confirmation as far as I recollect, is not very considerable, but it will stand, as I before stated to you, upon the manner in which the witnesses shall tell their story. They will swear that Ogden had a sword (I believe it was the only one in the company), and that he broke it in the scabbard, and part of the scabbard will be produced. He returned from the attack with Drake and Ben. Walker, through Clifton. I shall rely upon their evidence, if they give it in such a manner as to entitle themselves to any degree of credit, confirming then in other circumstances respecting other prisoners, and leaving it to you that there is every reason to believe that they speak the truth as to these.

James Brook is the next. I have the evidence of only two as to him. I told you I had selected the cases to which all the three accomplices spoke; I believe only two of the accomplices will speak to this prisoner, but I have better evidence to supply the place of that third accomplice in this instance; and the very circumstance of their not all speaking to the same men, is certainly a confirmation of their testimony, for it shows it is not a made-up story. I have the evidence of a woman, who lived next door to James Brook, who had the curiosity natural to women; and her attention being excited by the outrages committed at that time in that neighbourhood, and every body being in a state of alarm, this woman the morning after the attack on this mill, listened to what was said upon the subject, and she heard James Brook say, that he had never seen any thing so dreadful as it was. I will read the very words, which I understand she will repeat. without saying that they were applied to Rawfolds-mill. It will be for you to consider to what they apply; I do not say you must necessarily draw the conclusion I do. "Before I will be engaged in any thing of this sort again, I will suffer myself to be clammed to death; it was one of the most dreadful things I ever saw, and one might hear then screaming for half a mile." I shall prove by Mr. Cartwright that he heard the screams and groans of the mob for a considerable time, in consequence of the very proper conduct of the people within the mill.

The next person in the indictment is John Brook. This man has, independently of the fact that will be sworn to, of his being there, admitted in conversation that he was there, and said to another person, whom I shall call, while a search for arms was making at Wood's shop, that the fire-arms were removed, that he removed them, and that no-one knew where they were, but himself and the persons who received them.

With respect to Thomas Brook, there is a very remarkable circumstance I shall establish as to him. It will appear to you, by the evidence of Mr. Cartwright himself, and of one of his men, if it will be necessary to call any of his man to confirm him (and I must call a man to speak as to this fact perhaps), that in the pond at the back of the mill, amongst other things, there was found a hat. This hat will be produced to you. It belonged to Thomas Brook; at least we say so, the accomplices will say so, and I shall confirm them by proving, that in their way home after the attack upon this mill, when they were driven off, they stopped at the house of a man of the name of Naylor, and borrowed a hat of his wife; and she was asked, whether her husband was at home? to which she answered, he was not; as he was not. I shall call her. Whether she will prove this fact or not, I am not sure, for she will not speak out, but that hat was, as I shall prove, afterwards sent home to Naylor's house. It is my duty, therefore, to impress these facts on your consideration; you will always judges of the circumstances.

The next prisoner is John Walker, In addition to the testimony of the accomplices, I have the evidence Joseph Sowden, who will tell you that John Walker took the active part which I have stated, in coming to Wood's manufactory, and speaking to them about the system of shear-breaking, and solicited the witness, with Dean, to join the party. Sowden will tell you of his positive refusal; he will also further tell you, that he heard John Walker admit that he was at the attack upon Mr. Cartwright's mill, and that whilst he was looking in at the window during the attack, a ball struck the edge of his hat; that he had noticed the flash of the musket within, and that he thereupon thrust his hand and pistol through the broken window, taking the best aim he could, and that he was determined to do it, if his hand had been shot off, and both hand and pistol had fallen into the mill. I do not state this to be true, but that Walker made this statement after the attack, whether boasting of his own prowess, I care not; but he confirms the accomplice in this way, that he was at that attack; and Sowden will go on to say, that both before and after that attack, he threatened him, and did every thing he could to persuade him to join them in these outrages.

Gentlemen, I hope you and my lords will not think I have trespassed too long in this narration; I am nearly at the end of it. On The part of Hirst I have an express admission, saying. "We were ordered to meet at the obelisk in sir George Armytage's fields. When we got there we found a great many men, who said, that if we did not go with them they would shoot us." Very likely threats were used with respect to them. "So we went to Rawfolds and we saw some firing, to be sure. I came home as far as Hartshead with William Hall." Hall will prove his coming home with this man, and that he was there at the time of the attack.

This is the case I have to lay before you; from my experience here on these trials, I know I am to  expect some defence; I am to expect a defence probably as to character. But permit me to say, the defence as to character, hitherto, has not been at all applicable to the subject. It has been proved that the prisoners are honest, industrious, hard-working men. What has that to do with their allegiance and submission to lawful authority and government? It has a bearing on it. And I am sorry to say, that these deluded persons, and others in their situation (I say this publicly and loudly, for the purpose of its being made known) have got it into their heads (where such an erroneous idea both in law, morals, and religion, can be found, I do not know) that it is no harm to destroy this property, if they do not steal, and do not commit murder. This is the doctrine, I am told, that these people hold out among themselves. If they put such an unction to their own souls, they will find, when it is too late, that they have flattered themselves in vain. If any persons have imposed upon them, it is a dreadful responsibility. If persons in higher life have held out to them such doctrines, their guilt is most enormous, and they may have to consider whether they are not answerable for the crimes of these unfortunate men. The delicacy of the English bar has introduced a sort of custom, not to put questions on cross-examination, to witnesses called to character; and that course we have generally pursued. We have also had the defence of alibi; and I would remark, that alibis are generally true in substance. I know persons, unaccustomed to these matters, are often induced to say, How can people make up such a train of circumstances? Why, the circumstances, gentlemen, are generally true; only give another date, and then the story is all true. And their maxim is, as it was said yesterday, that it is no harm to tell one lie to save a brother.

When you have heard the evidence, you will lay your hands upon your hearts, and upon the consideration of the whole of the circumstances that may be proved, will give a just verdict.

The evidence for the Crown, and for the Prisoners, will be found fully stated in the following Summing-up:

Mr. Justice *Le Blanc*, Gentlemen of the Jury: This charge, the inquiry into which has occupied the whole of your day, is brought against the several prisoners at the bar, of the names of James Haigh, Jonathan Dean, John Ogden, James Brook, John Brook, Thomas Brook, John Walker, and John Hirst, eight in number; who stand indicted, with three other persons, who are not now at the bar, having been convicted on a former indictment of a heinous offence.

The indictment charges that they, with a number of other evil-disposed persons, assembled together at Liversedge on the 11th of April, unlawfully, riotously, tumultuously and feloniously, to the disturbance of the public peace; and that being so assembled, they with force unlawfully and feloniously did begin to demolish and pull down a certain mill of one William Cartwright, there standing and being, against the king's peace: So that the substance of the charge is, that these persons, with a great number of others, assembled in a riotous manner, did not demolish, but began to demolish and pull down the mill of this Mr. Cartwright. And it is founded upon the positive law of the country. A former act, which may be better known by the name of the Riot act, had for the purpose of preventing the ill consequences of a number of evil-disposed persons meeting riotously and tumultuously and doing mischief, made it penal (in the same manner as this act now does with respect to mills) for persons so assembled either to set fire to or demolish or pull down any houses, barns, or a variety of other things which are there enumerated. In process of time, as mills became frequently the object of the vengeance of persons tumultuously assembled, this particular act, which was passed in the 9th year of the present king, was made to include mills of all descriptions, because it uses the expression "wind-saw-mill or other windmill, or any water-mill or other mill;" so that there is no doubt it includes all mills by which a power is used for the purpose of working machinery, just in the same manner as it dees mills either for grinding flour, or for performing the operation of sawing timber; and that it makes it in the same manner penal, to demolish or begin to demolish or pull down mills of any description, as the former act had made it to begin to demolish dwelling houses. Therefore the only question will be, whether these persons, or any of them, did assemble in a tumultuous manner, and whether they began to demolish this mill. It was not, in fact, demolished, in consequence of the spirit displayed by the owner of it, and which one wishes the possessor of every house, and of every description of property in this country, that may happen to be attacked, would display; and that each would collect what force he could, and stand forward in the defence and protection of his own property, receiving such assistance as the government and the laws of his country would afford him. It would prove the most effectual and the best way of suppressing all tumults and riots of this description, if at the first moment every person would manfully stand forward in the manner this gentleman did, in the defence of his property. And it appears that by picking the best defence he and the persons in this mill with him could, they in fact succeeded in driving the assailants off, before they had demolished the mill; but you will consider whether they had not begun to do it, looking to the instruments they brought with them, and the progress they made in that which they appear to have gone there with an intention of doing.

The first witness called, is Mr. William Cartwright, the possessor of this mill, situate at Rawfolds, in the township of Liversedge, which he held under a lease, and which was used for the purpose of finishing cloth. He says, that a short time before the 11th of April he had entertained apprehensions that an attack was meditated, and was in the contemplation of some of those persons who were actuated by that very mischievous spirit which was then afloat in the country, and that it would be made upon this mill of his at Rawfolds; that he had slept in the mill himself for six weeks before, and had armed some of his work-people, who slept in the mill with him; and in consequence of the indisposition or illness of some of his workmen, had got the assistance of a few military also to sleep with him in the mill; that he had altogether ten, five military, and five not military. That on the Saturday, which was the 11th of April, the night when this affair happened, they themselves had gone to rest soon after twelve o'clock at night; that a quarter of an hour after he had retired to rest he was alarmed by the barking of a large dog, chained within the building for the purpose of giving the alarm; that he immediately got out of bed, and on opening the door of a small apartment in which he slept, he heard a violent breaking of the windows on the ground floor, and at the same time a discharge of musketry or fire-arms at the windows of the ground and upper floors, and he heard likewise a violent hammering at one of the doors of his mill, and the voices of a number of persons at the others; that on one side of this building of his there is a pool of water, which, I suppose, works the wheel that set the machinery in motion; that upon hearing this, they all flew to their arms; that he had placed a bell upon the top of his building, for the purpose of giving an alarm, in concert with the military stationed at no great distance; and he and his people set that bell ringing, and discharged their muskets through the loop holes of the mill, in an oblique direction with respect to the situation where he was standing; and that the fire was kept up by the people without, and they in return fired from within. They heard the cries of the persons on the outside, encouraging their companions who were engaged in this attack, and then he repeats the language which he heard them utter at that time, "Bang up, my lads — In with you — Are you in, my lads? — Keep close — In with you, lads — Damn them, kill them every one." And then, "Damn that bell, get it," referring to the bell which he was ringing in order to give the alarm. All this shows that there were a considerable number of persons, and that they were encouraging each other in doing that which they were then about, namely, breaking into this mill for the purpose of destroying it. He says that the number of the assailants seemed to be very considerable, but it was in the night, and he was in the building, so that he cannot form a judgment as to their number; that, judging from the number of cartridges they had fired from within, this attack must have lasted as long as twenty minutes; and that when the fire from the people without slackened, he heard the cries of persons who appeared to be wounded from the fire which he had kept up from within, and an attempt by the people to carry off some of them who had been wounded. He says that they immediately slackened that fire within, as the others slackened their fire without; and upon that the people without appeared to separate themselves, and take different routs, but both routs leading back to Huddersfield. He says a person of the name of Cockell came up, before he himself had opened the door so as to be able to see what was without; and upon this person coming up, probably hearing the alarm of the bell and what was doing, they opened their doors and went out; and he gives an account of what they found on the outside of the house when they went out, that they found two men lying there who had been wounded, and whom the party had not carried off; that these persons were taken to a public house, to be taken care of. That when daylight came in the morning they examined more particularly the state of the mill, and they found that all the frames and the glass of all the windows on the ground-floor of the mill were broken to pieces, except about nine panes of glass out of three hundred; that the door of the mill had been chopped with a hatchet, and had received many blows with what they call malls, by which the pannels of the door were broken and chopped to pieces in holes, so that men might nearly put their beads through them; that part of the jambstones of the door were likewise broken out by means of the instruments with which they had been hammering and forcing the doors; and the frames of many of the upper windows were broken, and many squares of glass. He describes his building as a stone building; the windows were put into framework, as I understand, in stone; the frames were broken as well as the squares of glass, in some instances the whole window, glass, frame and all, was entirely forced in and broken; there was not one frame, upon the whole of the ground-floor, that was not rendered wholly useless, so as to require it to be made quite anew. So that I collect from his account, that these frames fixed into the stone work were in some instances entirely destroyed and smashed in, and the doors broken in the same way, and the stone jambs in two instances broken off. This is the only evidence given of the injury to the mill; and the question is, whether there was not a beginning to demolish some part of that which formed the fabric of the mill; not the breaking of glass windows (for that would not be a beginning to demolish), but here was a breaking of the frames of the windows; and you will judge of their intent from the number that came, and the manner in which they attacked he mill, which was such, that nothing but a vigorous resistance would have prevented the whole from being demolished.

James Sandys, who was one of Mr. Cartwright's men, says, that the next morning he found some of the malls and hatchets, which have been produced and laid upon the table; that he found one of the hammers, and a hammer-head, and that he saw other of the weapons, laid upon the table, brought in by the persons who had picked them up on the outside. That is the account of the instruments as far as they can be given in evidence, which appear to have been used by any of the persons who composed the party making this attack, and you have had an opportunity of seeing the sorts of instruments: some of them appear to be sledge-hammers, and an adze, and another, what they call a mail, all which are instruments of that force and description as to be capable of breaking a door, and of breaking through the windows. The only other article spoken to by one of Mr. Cartwright's servants, is one which is brought forward at this time, for the purpose of applying it afterwards to evidence produced by others, to fix upon one of the prisoners the having been there. James Wilkinson says, the next morning he found a hat which he produced, in the water of the mill-dam. So that there was a hat, which had been left there. You will find, when you come to hear the evidence, that particularly applies to the case of one of the prisoners, that one of those, who had attacked his mill, had lost his hat.

These facts having been laid before you, to prove the body of the offence committed, as charged in the indictment, when one considers the number of persons tumultuously and riotously assembled at the time of night at which they camOy the language used, and the manner in which the attack was conducted; it is impossible to doubt that this was a most riotous and tumultuous assembly of ill-disposed persons, and that they came there for the purpose of disturbing the public peace: and you will say, whether they did not begin to demolish and pull down this mill.

The next question will be, whether any of the prisoners now at the bar, were parties engaged in this assembly. In inquiries of this description, in order to constitute the guilt of a person charged, either with the pulling down a house, if the house be entirely demolished, or the beginning to demolish and pull down the house, where the assailants are prevented from carrying their purpose fully into effect, it is not necessary to fix upon the persons who actually fired any of the pieces that did the mischief, or whose hands actually directed any of the malls or hammers which broke the windows or the doors; but every person who mixes and engages with a tumultuous assembly of this sort, who is present assisting the rest by his countenance and by his voice and encouragement while the fact is committed, is equally guilty, either of actually demolishing or of beginning to demolish (as the case may be) with the man whose hand actually broke the door or began to pull down the building. And therefore it does not become necessary to inquire particularly what each individual prisoner did, but whether he made part of this riotous mob or assembly at Mr. Cartwright's mill at Rawfolds.

In order to show that the prisoners were of the party, they have called on the part of the prosecution, first, a man of the name of William Hall, who is in that branch of the woollen business, called a cropper, and who works at the shop of one John Wood,at Longroyd Bridge near Huddersfield. He says that the other persons, whom he names, one of the name of Sowden, another of the name of Benjamin Walker, another of the name of Varley, and others, worked at this shop; and he proceeds to give an account of the preparations which were made for this attack. He says that one Joshua Dickinson, who was a journeyman cropper, came to their shop on Saturday the 11th of April, and brought some powder and balls. It does not appear that any of these men now at the bar, were then working at the shop. HftU says, that Dickinson brought near a pint of powder, and a little bag of balls, and two or three cartridges, not more; that in consequence of the directions which were given, he (William Hall) among the rest, went that night into sir George Armytage's fields, which appear to have been the place of meeting; that he (Hall) went with Smith and Dyson; that as they went along they overtook George Brook, of Lockwood; that when they got to six George Armytage's fields, it was about ten o'clock at night; that they found there about two or three score people assembled together; that they stayed there good part of an hour, that by that time a number of people who had been got together amounted to a good deal above a hundred, and that they then began to be called over and mustered, not by names (names might have been dangerous for every body would hear them), but by numbers, each man having a particular number appropriated, to which he was to answer; that he himself was No. 7, and answered to that number; that there were different companies, a musket company, a pistol company, and a hatchet company; that Mellor and Thorpe (who were convicted upon a former indictment, and who appear to have been the leaders) formed the men into a line; that the company of musket-men were formed in line, two deep; and then they ordered the witness Hall, and a man of the name of George Rigge, to go last, that is in the rear of all the persons, and to drive the people up, and to see that none of them went back. That they accordingly marched from the fields of sir George Armytage towards the mill of Mr. Cartwright, at Rawfolds, over a moor called Hartshead Moor, the mill of Mr. Cartwright being about three miles from these fields of sir George Armytage; and he describes this particular spot in the fields of sir George Armytage as being a place where there was what they call a dumb steeple (an obelisk, or something of that kind); he further says, that these other people, who had neither muskets nor pistols, had some of them malls, and some of them hatchets, and some had nothing at all; that as they went along, many of them got sticks or stakes, by way of arming themselves; that they were stopped before they got to the mill and were formed into lines thirteen abreast; that Mellor formed his company of musket-men, and he thinks Thorpe belonged to the next company, the pistol-men.

Then he gives an account of the names of those persons whom he recollects to have seen while they were in the fields of sir George Armytage, and before they marched to Hartshead Moor, near the mill of Mr. Cartwright. He says that he there saw James Haigh, one of the prisoners, Jonathan Dean the prisoner, standing next to him; John Ogden, James Brook, and John Brook; but that he did not see Thomas Brook there. He says that he saw John Walker there, and he saw John Hirst there; but John Hirst he did not afterwards see at the mill, then he proceeds to state, that when they had been formed into a line, they went on to the mill; that there was a deal of firing, and knocking with their malls and hatchets at the mill; and that at one time Mellor, who appears to have been their leader, cried out, that the door was opened; and some of them cried out, "Fire at the bell," for the purpose of shooting away the bell (or, more likely, the rope to the bell) that he heard one of them say that there was a man shot; that he himself fired twice into the mill, and that there was firing from the mill and into the mill, and that that firing continued nearly twenty minutes. He says the door in front was cut through, but it was never opened. You recollect the account Mr. Cartwright gave, was, that the door was never burst open, though the pannels were broken so as to admit a man's head. He further says, that they all afterwards got away as fast as they could, in all directions; that he himself w«nt through the beck or stream from the mill-pool, and made for High Town, and that the reason he went to High Town, was, that he met with the prisoner Hirst, whom he had seen at the fields of sir George Armytage before they went to the moor, and whom he saw afterward when they were forming near the mill, and that he went homewards with him towards High Town, where Hirst was going; that he did not himself go home that night, but went back to sir George Armytage's fields. He then states, that about a fortnight after this business had taken place, Thomas Brook brought a hat to the shop of John Wood, and told the witness to get it to where it belonged if he could, and that Mellor would know to whom it belonged. This will not be intelligible, without attending in the first place to what was proved by the people belonging to Mr. Cartwright's mill, that there was a hat found in the pool of the mill, so that some one person who was there had lost a hat. You will find in the course of the evidence, that a person in going home, called to borrow a hat, and had a hat lent to him; and that a fortnight after, a hat was brought to this shop of Mr. Wood, where the people worked, and that Hall was desired to get it to the place where it belonged, to return that hat, which they had found a woman kind enough to lend them in their return from the mill. He also says that Mellor, when Thomas Brook gave him that direction, referred him to the House of Samuel Naylor, where the man had called and borrowed the hat in his return.

On his cross-examination, Hall says that that night at ten o'clock he could see tolerably well, that it was not very dark, not so dark but he could know a man when he was near him, and that he saw the men when they were standing about in that field, that they occupied a very large space, a larger space than this court. This is the evidence of William Hall, who (it is not necessary to observe to you) was as much implicated in this mischief, as any one of the persons standing at the bar. He is not therefore a person standing in that upright situation, that you can receive his evidence without considerable distrust and caution; and therefore you will examine and see, whether, from the other facts proved in the cause, and the testimony of other witnesses, these facts or any of them are proved by other evidence, so as to convince you that, bad as he is, yet in this respect, he speaks the truth. His evidence is to be left to your consideration, but, from the account of his being engaged in this transaction, he does not shew himself in that light, that you can look at his evidence without caution. You will see how the other evidence in the cause falls in with his, and if you believe that he is telling the truth to you upon this transaction, he is a witness upon whose testimony you will rely.

The next witness called is Joseph Drake, who is a cloth-dresser, and worked at John Drake's. He says, that he likewise was at Mr. Cartwright's mill on Saturday night the 11th of April, and that he went there with the prisoners John Walker and Jonathan Dean; that they went together from Dean's house; that he had known them both some time; that they set out at ten o'clock at night to go to sir George Armytage's fields, which was the place they were appointed to meet at; that, as they were going, they overtook several people who were going the same way, but none of the prisoners were among those whom they overtook; that when they were all assembled together in the fields of sir George Armytage, the number might amount from 130 to 150 persons; that in these fields of sir George Armytage they were mustered into companies by numbers, and were placed two by two; that the company to which he (Drake) belonged, was the pistol company, a company where the men's arms were pistols; how many companies here were he does not know, but there were companies both of muskets and of pistols, and a company of men they called hatchet men; that they proceeded, two by two, to Cartwright's mill; that sixty yards before they arrived at the mill they halted, and he did not go nearer than about sixty yards from the mill; that there were a good many stopped behind the main body, which proceeded on to the mill; that he gave his pistol up before he halted (he does not tell us what he did there, or for what purpose they halted there); that a good many of them proceeded on to the mill; that he heard a loud firing, and that it continued from a quarter of an hour to twenty minutes; that he remained within the distance of sixty yards of the mill during the whole time this was going on; that a good many had proceeded to the mill, he cannot say how many.

Then he gives an account of those persons among the prisoners at the bar, whom he knows to have been there. He says Jonathan Dean was there, and had a hammer with him; John Walker was there, and he had a pistol, and a smock frock on. He says that he does not know James Haigh; that he was solicited to go there by Walker; that he himself did not go to Walker after the attack, but that he saw he prisoner Thomas Brook somewhere near High Town, which was the place to which many of them went in their way home after the attack; that at that time he did not know him, and that that night was the first time he had seen him; that when he saw him near High Town, he was without his hat, and his clothes were very wet, and he thinks he said he had been in the dam; that Mellor was with Thomas Brook at that time; that at High Town they stopped at the house of one Samuel Naylor, where a hat was borrowed, by George Mellor, of a woman, for Thomas Brook; that Thomas Brook went home in that hat. That is the evidence I alluded to, when I stated to you, that evidence would afterwards be given, confirmatory of the circumstance of the hat having been found; so that it should appear that Thomas Brook was the person who had been in the water, and had lost his hat, and that he called with Mellor and this witness, and borrowed a hat, with which he went home; and it was to this house that Mellor afterwards desired the former witness to contrive the means of getting this hat back again. He then describes them as calling at another place, called Clifton, and that if Mellor and Brook called for something to eat; it, was a private house, and they asked for some muffin and water, which were given to them by a woman out of a window. Afterwards, you will recollect, that both the woman, at whose house they called at, High Town, to borrow the hat, and the woman at whose house they called at Clifton, to get some bread and some water; are called to prove that persons whom they did not know called, and that they supplied them, the one with a hat, and the other with some muffin-bread and some water, out of the window. This witness says that he met with John Ogden at High Town after the attack was over; that he then had a pistol with him, and said he had been at the attack of Mr. Cartwright's mill; that they went together to a place which he calls Cawcliff, where they parted; and that he knows him well, and, has seen him often between that time and this.

They next call a man of the name of Benjamin Walker, who says that he was one of the party that went to Rawfolds mill on the hight of the attack, with Thomas Smith and Thorpe; that he saw none of the prisoners in sir George Armytage's fields, nor till he got to the mill, when they were called over, and he answered to No. 13; that they were formed in sir George Armytage's fields; that they then went into a close a little way before they got to the mill; that he himself had a gun, and was in the first company, which Mellor led; that that company was chiefly armed with guns; that in the place where they halted just before they got to the mill, he saw the prisoner Jonathan Dean, and he took particular notice of him, because he gave him a sip of rum before they halted, after they had left sir George Armytage's fields, and just before they came up to the mill; that he does not know whether Dean had a hammer or not; that after having so halted, they went up to the mill; that when they got up to the mill, there was firing on both sides; that he fired; that he saw a man of the name of Booth there, wounded, who is since dead; that when he got home he went into Jonathan Dean's house; that Dean was then in bed, and his hands were bleeding, and he said he had got sadly hurt, and that he had been shot in his finger. He says the persons with whom he went home from the mill that night were, George Mellor, Joseph Drake, Thomas Brook, and another chap from Cawcliff, whose name he did not know (this answers Drake's account of Ogden); that they stopped a little while as they went along, and got a hat for Thomas Brook (this accords with the account likewise given by the former witness); that Thomas Brook told them that he had lost his own in the mill-goit, that he had fallen into the mill pond, and his clothes were very wet. The fact that somebody's hat was in the mill-goit is clear by the evidence of the servants of Mr. Cartwright; and this man as well as the other, speaks to Thomas Brook afterwards having his clothes wet, and calling at the house of Naylor for the purpose of getting a hat for him. This witness further says, that in going from sir George Armytage's fields to the place where they hailed before they got up to the mill, he saw another of the prisoners, John Walker, who had then a pistol with him, but he never saw him afterwards; that while they were in sir George Armytage's fields, he saw also the prisoner James Haigh there, and he thinks he was armed with a mall; that he never saw Haigh any part of the time but that; (but, from the evidence which was given afterwards, it appears as if there was no doubt of his being somewhere else, as well as in these fields; he says they stopped at Clifton, and got some bread and some water, it was what they called muffin-bread, which was given them by a woman out of a window; that he himself had both a gun and a pistol, and he gave the gun to a man of the name of Varley; that he had on a mask, and some of the others had masks on, which they were directed to burn when the attack was over.

This is the evidence of these three persons, who may be considered as all engaged in the very same tumult, riot and felony as the prisoners, and who have given this account of seeing the prisoners there.

The next person called was a man of the name of Sowden, who was another workman in the shop of Mr. Wood, but was not with the party at the mill. He says that he himself was not at the attack of the mill; that he knows Jonathan Dean, John Walker, and the three Brooks, That in the beginning of the following week after this attack upon Rawfolds, which happened on Saturday night, he heard John Walker say in Mr. Wood's shop, that he had a horse pistol in his hand at the time of the attack, and that while looking in at Mr. Cartwright's window, there came a ball and struck the corner of his hat, and that he put his hand through the window with his pistol, and aimed it as well as he could to the point from which the flash of the pistol, the ball from which had hit the corner of his hat, came, and he thought that if his hand went with it, it should go: So that this was at least the boast which John Walker made the beginning of the week after in this shop, where so many of the persons who had joined in this business were. This witness also says, that John Walker and Jonathan Dean, were the first persons that brought any intimation to the shop, where these people worked, that frame-breaking was going on; that they came to them at their shop (that is the shop where Sowden worked) to request him and his shopmates to meet, and consider and adopt plans for the destruction of machinery on the same principle as had been done at Nottingham.

On his cross-examination, he says that he himself never approved of the plan of framebreaking, that he detested it, that he did not join in any of it; that he did not at that time imagine it would be brought to such a pass as it was afterwards brought to; that he did not discover any of the circumstances he has related today, until he was asked, and he gives as a reason, because he was of a timid disposition, and was afraid of the consequences to himself; but that the first time he was ever questioned about it (which was the 24th of October) he told every thing he had heard upon the subject, he never having engaged in these transactions, but having heard what had been said in the shops. That is the account given by Sowden. He himself cannot fix upon any one of these persons as having been there, not having been there himself, according to his own account. He only speaks as to John Walker having boasted, at beginning of the next week, of the part he had taken.

The next witness is Mary Brook, who is to substantiate the account which the witnesses have given with respect to her having delivered them the muffin and the water out of the window at Clifton. She says, that on the night of this stir (as it is called) at Rawfolds, after she was in bed, some people came to her door, and asked to buy some bread of her, and that she gave them some muffin-bread and a pitcher of water through the window, and they gave her threepence for it. It is stated by the accomplices that they stopped, and had these articles in this way.

Then Sarah Naylor, who lives in High Town, through which some of these men went in their way home, states, that she remembers the night of Mr. Cartwright's mill being attacked; that in the course of that night, some persons, whom she did not know, called at her house, and asked her to lend them a man's hat, that she saw only one person that asked for it, and she lent it; and that not long after, she cannot particularly speak to the tune, it was brought back again.

Richard Tatterson, and the two other next witnesses, are called to prove circumstances with respect to the prisoner Haigh, for the purpose of shewing that Haigh was at Cartwright's, and that he was one of the persons who were wounded there and carried off. Tatterson says that he practises surgery a little, and lives at Lepton, nearly four miles and a half from Huddersfield. That on Sunday the 12th of April. which was the day after the attack on the mill, a person came to his house, whom at that time he did not know, but whom he since knows, from what he saw of him on a subsequent day, to be the prisoner Haigh. That he came to him on the Sunday and was with him him again on the Tuesday, and that he dressed his wound, that he saw him again when he was at Mr. Radcliffe the magistrate's, and that he then knew him to be Haigh; that the time at which he came to him on the Sunday was four o'clock in the afternoon, that he said he wanted his wound dressed; that the wound was at the back of the right shoulder; that he examined it, it was an inch and a half deep; it was an open wound, from the upper part of the arm, as he described it, down to the lower part of the arm, cut open the whole way; that there was nothing driven into it or out of it, as he saw, either way, but there was a little bit of lint at the upper edge, and it was driven sideways; it was more wide than it was deep, it was a largish wound both in depth and width; that Haigh told him he came from Dalton, and that he had done it against a stone. The witness says that he said nothing to Haigh, but only dressed the wound; that it appeared to him to be a bruise, as if it had been done by a fall against a stone; it was fresh and bleeding, and the arm was bloody; that he sewed it up at each end and in the middle, and gave him some salve to dress it with, and he saw him again on the Tuesday; and that is all that he knows about it.

Joseph Culpan, who lives at a lone house at a place called Peniston Green, at the distance of fourteen miles from Huddersfield (Tatterson's being four miles and a half) says, that Dalton may be twelve miles distant from Peniston Green; that a master cloth-dresser, a relation of his, of the name of Ardron, who lives at Dalton, came with another person to this lone house where the witness Culpan lives, at Peniston Green, on the 15th of April, four days after the night of the attack, at twelve or one o'clock at night; that he asked them what they came for, and Ardron said, to smoke a pipe; that his wife knew Ardron's voice, and therefore desired him to open the door, which he did, and let them in; that he bad no fire at that time; that Ardron asked him to let them stay there till daylight, and said the man that had come with him had got a hurt; that he did not then know Ardron's companion, but he now knows it as the prisoner Haigh, who appeared to be lame about his shoulder; that they had but one bed in the house; that after Ardron and his companion had been in a little while, the witness and his wife got up, and gave them the preference of laying down in their bed, and they themselves stayed up till next morning; that they then breakfasted together, and then the witness Culpan and Ardron went out together, leaving Haigh at this lone house at Peniston with Culpan's wife, to stop there till Ardron came back; that Ardron and the witness went together to a place cslled Unshelf, and from that to Ardron's mother's at Wiley Bridge, and afterwards they came back again; that Haigh went from that house to the house of Ardron's mother, at Wiley Bridge the afternoon of the same day; that Haigh was a man who worked with Ardron, Ardron being his master. The witness then describes the distance from his house to Ardron's mother's house to be about a mile, and from his house to Ardron's twelve miles. So that according to the account he gives, and particularly when you come to compare it with the evidence of the constable afterwards, it appears that Haigh came the very next day to Tatterson's house to have this wound dressed, and that afterwards he was brought to Peniston, and taken from place to place, evidently for the purpose of concealment; for no account is given by evidence of what other could be the reason of his master carrying him in this way to a lone house on Peniston Green, getting him put to bed there, and then arranging for him to go to his mother's in another place.

Mr. Thomas Atkinson, who acted as a constable on this occasion, says that, having a warrant to apprehend the prisoner Haigh on the 23rd of April, he went on that day to his house at Dalton, but did not find him there; that he was not there himself, nor his wife; that he found they had been brewing, and that the beer was in the brewing vessels, just in the way in which it had been left, without ever having been turned at the time when, in the regular order and process, it should have been turned. He pursued him from thence to Tatterson's, where he had got scent of this man having been to be dressed; not finding him there, he then went to Peniston Green; and not finding him there, he then went to Mrs. Ardron's at Wiley Bridge, and thence to Wragby, and thence to Methley, where at last he found him on the evening of the 23rd; that was twelve days after the night when the attack had been made; that this is altogether a distance, by the shortest road, of nineteen miles from Dalton; but going round in the way in which Haigh is proved to have gone, it is much further than that; and that at the time he found him at his brother-in-laws, he was wounded in the shoulder. So that the first object of this evidence is to show, that in the situation in which Haigh was with a wound in his shoulder, which had made him lame, he had gone away from his own house taking this long circuit, and moving about from place to place; when, for a man who wanted rest for the sake of his wound, it would have been more convenient to stay at his own house, if there was not a strong reason against it, namely, the apprehension of his being detected. The witness says that they took Haigh before a magistrate, and he was then examined, on the 14th; that the arm was examined; that something was said about the shirt, upon which the shirt he then had on was taken off (and that shirt you, gentlemen, have seen), and that another was given him. He adds that the shirt was examined by a military gentleman who was present, Major Gordon, and that he in the prisoner's presence said it was a musket-ball that had made that hole in the prisoner's shirt, and that the prisoner made no observation upon it. That was, however, mere opinion, and it was evidence only because it was stated in the presence of the prisoner, and which he ought to have answered by explaining how it was that it had been occasioned.

Michael Bentley says, that he lives at Methley; that he saw the prisoner Haigh at his house the day before he was taken up, when he came to be shaved; that when he saw him there and shaved him, he was lame in the shoulder; he thinks it was the left shoulder. This is clearly a mistake, for there is no doubt that the wound was in the right shoulder.

Fanny Milnes is called to speak respecting the prisoner James Brook. She says she lived next door to him at Lockwood, and that the Sunday after this attack, she saw a great deal of whispering at his house; that on that morning she saw James Brook, who, according to her account, from the motion of his hand appeared to be telling some sorrowful tale; that she did not hear what he said; that there were plenty of men, who belonged to the cloth-dressers, were coming to his house, and that she, living next door, heard James Brook say, that of all the dismal dins any body ever heard, that was the most dismallest, and that you might hear it half a mile, and he had rather be dammed to death than be in such a stir again. What he was alluding to, she does not know; this was all that she overheard, and she says, it was between ten and eleven o'clock. Upon her cross-examination, she says that her husband had taken up this James Brook upon some former occasion, and had taken him before a magistrate without a warrant; that Brook was detained during the night and then discharged; and that Brook then brought an action against him for that assault and false imprisonment, and that he recovered against her husband a verdict with some considerable damages. Then she is asked, whether she ever said that on that account she would be even with him, or with the family of the Brooks, or any thing of that kind; and she denies ever having used those expressions. Her evidence only shows that her husband, at least, had something as a matter of complaint against Brook, and from her evidence it appeared that she thought that Brook had received a verdict for damages against her husband which he ought not and therefore she might not owe him any very good will.

The last piece of evidence produced on the part of the prosecution, is the examination of the prisoner of the name of Hirst before Mr. Scott, on the 2nd of November last. When this charge was made against him, and he was asked what he had to say, he said, "We were ordered to meet at the obelisk in sir George Armytage's fields; when we got there, we found a great many men, who said that if we did not go with then they would shoot us; so we went to Rawfolds, and we saw some firing, to be sure. I came home as far as Hartshead with William Hall." That is the only account he gives; he does not deny his meeting in sir George Armytage's fields with the rest, and his going on, but he attributes his going on from sir George Armytage's, to their threatening that they would shoot him if he did not; but he does not state any reason why he met the rest at sir George Armytage's before they proceeded to the attack of this mill.

This is all the evidence on the part of the prosecution, and it shortly consists of this; of the evidence of those persons who stood in the situation of accomplices, who were there themselves, and who speak of the prisoners at the bar being there also in different parts of the transaction, and likewise give an account of the different circumstances which took place in going to this mill, while there, and during the time when they were going home; and of the testimony of different witnesses from various places, as to these separate and distinct circumstances, to confirm the accomplices in those parts of the case to which they have alluded. They have likewise called to yea that witness of the name of Sowden, who was himself no part in any of these transactions, but was working in the same shop where the others worked, and who speaks of course to nothing that took place that night, he not having been with any one of them, but gives evidence as to one of the prisoners, Walker, having, the beginning of the week after, boasted of the part he had taken in the attack of this mill. With respect to Haigh, there is all that evidence, none of which is at all explained on his part, of his having, on the very next day, been dressed for a wound in the shoulder; the account that he gave, being, that it was cut by a stone in consequence of a fall which he had had; and then as to the manner in which he was treated, by being carried about from place to place, till he was apprehended where the constable afterwards found him. And then you have, as to particular prisoners, that which has been proved, and the admission, in the examination of Hirst himself, that he was there, and that he went from the mill as for as Hartshead with William Hall; and so far by his own acknowledgment he confirms the account which William Hall, who was one of the accomplices examined before you, gave, that this man Hirst was one of the persons who went home in company with him.

On the part of the prisoners, they have gone into a considerable length of evidence, which, as there was so many different prisoners, it was of course to be expected they should go into. The first evidence gone into, was with respect to some of the prisoners at the bar, to show that this account, as far as it respects them, must be false or incorrect, because they were not there at the time. You observe, according to the evidence on the part of the crown, that, on the evening when this attack was made, they were appointed to meet at ten o'clock at night, in sir George Armytage's fields; that they stayed there some time, and afterwards marched up; and, according to the account given by Mr. Cartwright as to the time when it happened, it must have been a quarter, or thereabouts, after twelve, when the attack on the mill began, because he fixes the time when he went to bed to be soon after twelve, and says that in a quarter of an hour the attack began by their firing their pieces at the mill, and by knocking at the windows. The evidence goes to prove that three of these prisoners were elsewhere.

The first that they begin with, is James Brook. For him there is called a man of the name of Thomas Ellis, who says that he is a wool-stapler, that he lives at Lockwood; that he knows the prisoner James Brook, who lived with his father at Lockwood; and that on the Saturday when Mr. Cartwright's mill was attacked, he (Thomas Ellis) had stayed at Huddersfield till about nine o'clock in the evening; that after that he had stopped at Spring Gardens coffee-house, in his way home to Lockwood, till half past ten; that he then went towards home about a quarter of a mile; that in going home he saw James Brook opposite his house, going the same way that he (Ellis) was going, and that it was then a quarter before twelve at night. So that he would make it a quarter before twelve at night, that he, having spent the evening as late as past nine at Huddersfield, and afterwards at Spring Gardens, overtook James Brook near his own house at Lockwood. It is perfectly clear, from the distance and the time, that if James Brook was at Lockwood at a quarter before twelve that night, he could not have been at Mr. Cartwright's mill. He says there were several other people on the road at the time that he saw him. He is then asked as to character; and he says he believes there is not a man in Lockwood, nor all round, who bears a better character than all the Brooks do. There are two other Brooks as well as James Brook, prisoners upon this occasion.

The next witness upon the same facts is George Armitage, who lives at Lockwood. He says that on that same evening he was at Huddersfield, and returned home at nearly twelve o'clock at night, and that he saw the last witness, Thomas Ellis, and afterwards went from Thomas Ellis's in consequence of something Thomas Ellis had said to him, to James Brook's father's house, and that he there found James Brook the prisoner sitting by the fire, and that the father called to them while they were talking by the fire; that the next morning he heard what had been done at Rawfold's mill. Upon his cross-examination, he says, that he is a blacksmith; that he was a witness upon the former case of George Mellor; that he saw the clock at the time he was at

Ellis's and that it was somewhst near five minutes after twelve; that he never was applied to upon this subject, to recollect the transaction, or to speak to it, till he was subpoenaed. The same inquiry has been made of several of the witnesses, who speak to a particular hour on that night, when they saw particular persons. And they all of them state, that the next day they heard what had happened at Cartwright's mill; but still the next day there was no charge made against any of these prisoners, as having been engaged in any thing at Cartwright's mill, and therefore they were not asked at the time, whether they recollected this or that man being at home. It does not appear that any of them, except Haigh, were charged with this offence talking afterwards; and it is an observation made with regard to the accuracy with which they speak to having seen particular persons on that evening, that they may have been in the habit of seeing them other evenings.

Hannah Tweddle is then called, for the purpose of taking off the effect of (what had not perhaps a great deal) the evidence of the last witness called on the part of the prosecution, Fanny Milnes, who spoke to having heard a declamation made by James Brook, who lived next door to her, where she first saw by his action that he was telling a dismal story, and afterwards heard him say that it was one of the dismallest things he ever had heard in his life. Hannah Tweddle is called to prove some ill will on the part of Fanny Milnes towards Brook. She says, that she lived next door to Brook; that she knows Fanny Milnes; that she heard her say one day, that she was determined to see some of the Brooks distressed before they came from this place; and that she hoped to do it. She was falling out at that time with a young man at her door, and in the course of the altercation with this young man, she made use of these expressions. She said that this might be a few weeks back, and that she said, some of them must be hanged before they left this place. That merely applies to the question, what reliance may be fairly placed upon the account Fanny Milnes has given.

The next witnesses they called were with respect to the prisoner Thomas Brook, in order to show that he could not have been at the mill that night. John Ellis, a cloth-dresser at Lockwood, says, that he is acquainted with Thomas Brook, that he worked for Brook, that he did so on the day of the attack on Rawfolds mill; that they were very busy at work on the evening of that day, and that he and Thomas Elam and Jonathan Vickerman were working together; that Thomas Brook did not work at the shear-board where they were working; that he saw Thomas Brook come in that evening; that they had worked till he came to them to ask them whether they knew what time in the evening it was they were working to, and that he told them it was near twelve o'clock; that upon, that they immediately

laid away, and went into the house, and drew their wages; that there was no scarcity of work; that he cannot remember the names of the persons coming in during the time they were at work, but that they were at work till near twelve that night; that they all received their wages, namely, Elam, Vickerman, and himself, from Thomas Brook that night, soon after twelve o'clock, after he had called them from their work, asking them, if they knew how late it was, and that he gave each of them a pound note. Then he is asked, what passed when this money was paid; in what particular of the room it was paid, and at what table; and describes particularly that it was on the burling table, that stands near the door as you go in on the left-hand side, and that Brook put a pound note into each man's hand at the time they heard the clock strike twelve. At first he said the children were in the room, and then that he did not see the children; that one of them, which he says was badly, was on the wife's lap, and the others were in bed; that after he had so received this money, they went a little way together, that they and he then turned different ways. He is asked whether he could remember the time when first his master was taken up. He says he cannot. He says, too, that. they were working upon plain cloth, finishing it; he cannot specify the colour. He is asked this, which is material, whether Elam and Vickerman are here, and he says they are both here; but they are not called. Now, to be sure, when he speaks to a transaction of this sort, proving Thomas Brook in his house, and refers himself for confirmation to two other workmen, who must have seen every thing that he saw, and who, if in speaking to these particulars he has spoken truth, would agree with him in these particulars; it is obvious to remark, that unless it is pretty well known that they would not speak to those particulars, there appears no reason why they should not be called.

The next witness is as to John Walker. Richard Lee is called to prove him elsewhere; he says, that he knowns John Walker of Longroyd very well, that he has lived with him nearly six years at bed and board at his house; that on this Saturday night of the attack on the mill, he himself was at home at John Walker's house; that he went home, there at eight or nine in the evening, and stayed at home the whole of the night after; that Walker was not at home when first the witness went home, but that he came in between ten and eleven o'clock; that, after he came in, he went out for a little time with Joseph Walker to fetch two barrows of coals from Hannah Blakey's, and that at eleven o'clock, or soon afterwards, John Walker shaved Joseph Walker, and then Joseph Walker went to his own home, and he saw no more of him. He says that John Walker slept in the house that night; that the witness slept in the room over him; that John Walker always slept in the room below with his wife, and that he is sure he did not go out after that time, for that he heard him in bed. If his account was a true one, it is not material to inquire whether he went out afterwards for it is impossible he should have been at Rawfolds after that period: the question is whether his account is a true one. He says that after eleven o'clock he shaved this Joseph Walker, and that afterwards Joseph went away, and the prisoner John Walker went to bed with his wife, and he (Lee) up stairs; that Joseph Walker had been waiting for John Walker's coming in; that Joseph Walker had come in at ten, and had stayed till John Walker came in, and that nobody but he and Joseph Walker came in; that, as soon as John Walker came in, his wife told him they wanted coals, and that John Walker asked Joseph to go and help him fetch them, and that they accordingly went, and nothing was said about money to pay for them. He also says, that he never heard of John Walker being taken up till October.

Then Joseph Walker is called. He is the brother-in-law of John Walker, having married the wife's sister. He says that he was at the prisoner's house on the night of the attack on Cartwright's mill; that he went there to be shaved about ten o'clock; and thatwhen he arrived John Walker was at home. The other witness, Lee, had said, that Joseph Walker had come in, and waited with him, and with John Walker's wife, till John came home. Joseph Walker says, that he himself went to John Walker's house to be shaved about ten o'clock, and that, when he got there, John Walker was at home; that he asked him to assist him in getting a few coals; that they fetched two barrows from Hannah Blakey's; that after they had fetched them, the prisoner shaved him, and that then he left his house at twenty minutes before twelve, and went back to Huddersfield; that he heard the town clock strike just before he got home, just as he entered the town; that Lee, the last witness, was in the house when he came in. He is particularly asked, how John Walker was engaged when he went in; and he says, John Walker was sitting in his chair, honing his razors at the time he went in, at ten o'clock at night. To be sure, he differs materially in his recollection from Lee, for Lee says that Joseph Walker had come in and had waited for John Walker's coming in, for that John Walker was not at home; whereas, according to Joseph Walker's account, he found John Walker sitting in a chair, honing or whetting his razor, when he got in.

Hannah Blakey, the next witness, says, that she deals in coals; that she knows John Walker; that she remembers the affair at Rawfolds; that on that evening the prisoner came about eleven in the evening; that she knows it was the night Mr. Cartwright's mill was attacked, because they came so late, from having heard early the next morning what had happened. Why she should knew it from having heard the next morning what had happened, unless this prisoner was connected with what had happened, one does not know; for there was no change against this man at that time, as having been at the attack on the mill. She says he did not pay for the coals, and she put them down upon a slate; that she has always kept it in her recollection that it was this night. She was asked, what was the other time before that time, that the prisoner had been supplied with coals; and she says, he might be supplied every week, but it depended upon the season or the time of the year, but she cannot recollect any other time that he had been supplied, having kept no other night in her recollection but this particular night, which she kept in consequence of having heard of the attack on Cartwright's mill the next morning.

That is all the evidence given by the witnesses for the prisoners, for the purpose of showing that the account of the witnesses for the prosecution could not be true, because they were either at home or anywhere else; and it is applicable to James Brook, Thomas Brook, and John Walker.

They then call a number of witnesses as to the character of the different prisoners.

They call first, as to the character of James Haigh, the man who had the wound in the shoulder, Mr. Mills a cloth-dresser, who speaks to his having been apprentice with him, and that he has known him ever since, and he has always maintained a good character.

Joshua Wood, a cloth manufacturer, states, that he has known him a good while, and he has maintained a good character. As to Thos. Brook, he speaks to his character being good.

As to Jonathan Dean, they have called Joseph Brook, who states, that he has known him four years and upwards, that he has worked with him, that he is a cloth-finisher, and that his general character, since he has known him, has been a very good one.

James Garside says, that he is a cloth-dresser; that he has known the prisoner Dean six or seven years, and that his character at Longroyd Bridge, and in that neighbourhood, has been that of an honest and industrious nan.

Joshua Priestly has known Dean a dozen years, and during that time his general character has been that of a peaceable industrious man.

Joseph Riley, a tailor, has known Dean ever since he was a boy, and his general character has been very good. Then he speaks of a circumstance which seems to have nothing to do with this case; that when he was a little boy he had met with a wound in his head from the unkindness of his step-father, and that he had fits. But it cannot be pursued so as to show that he was not in a situation to know what he did, and to discern right from wrong; and, therefore, it appears to have nothing to do with the present inquiry.

Richard Beaumont says, that he is a clothier; that he knows the prisoner Ogden, who has worked for him two years last July; that he had known him five years, and that he always maintained an honest, industrious, and peaceable, character.

Abel Armitage, who is a clothier, says, that he has known Ogden five or six years, that he was always a very steady hard-working man, that he seemed very industrious, and that he has a wife and two children.

William Haigh speaks as to all the Brooks. He says he has known the three Brooks from their youth, and that they have borne a good honest character; that they are as honest people as any in the neighbourhood.

James Garside also says that he knows the three Brooks very well, and has known them seven or eight years, and that during that time, they have borne a very good character as honest industrious men.

Joshua Wood states, that, he has known Thomas Brook for many years, and he gives him a good character.

As to John Walker, William Haigh states, that he has known him for some years back, and that his general character has been that of a laborious honest man, for any thing he knows.

Then as to the last prisoner, Hirst, there are two witnesses, one of the name of Holdfield, and one of the name of Shipley; they have known him, one of them, ten or twelve years and the other during the whole of his life; and they speak of his having borne a good character during the whole of his life.

This is the evidence which has been given as to character. And with respect to the effect of character, the proper and the only proper influence it can have in inquiries into the truth or falsehood of a charge brought against prisoners, is this; that if the evidence leaves it a matter of fair and reasonable doubt whether a party is guilty or not; in common cases, if you prove that a prisoner up to that time has always maintained a good character, it will apply and balance in his favour; but if the evidence of guilt is satisfactory to the minds of a jury, evidence of previous good character cannot and ought not to have any avail.

The question in the present case will be, how far you are satisfied that the evidence which has been laid before you upon the part of the prosecution, has made out that, which they are bound for the prosecution to make out; that these several prisoners at the bar, or any of them, have been guilty of that crime which is laid to their charge; namely, beginning to demolish or pull down this mill of Mr. Cartwright's at the time stated in the indictment stated to you in the outset, how far all were implicated, who joined in that riotous meeting with that intent; and the question is, whether the prisoners at the bar are satisfactorily proved to have been of that number. To prove that they were so, there is the evidence of three persons standing in the situation of accomplices, standing therefore in the situation of persons, whose evidence you will receive with caution, with a degree of scrupulousness, and whom you will expect to be confined by persons whose testimony is less suspicious, before you give credit to the account they lay before you. You will judge how far they have or have not been supported by the other witnesses who have been called. It is not necessary, that in the whole of the account they give, they should be supported by other testimony; but if you find, from the support they receive from other witnesses, that they are telling truth in some particulars, you will, of course be justified in believing that they are telling yon truth in the whole of their narration. On the contrary, if you find that they are speaking falsely in some particulars, you will then mistrust their testimony in the whole. Now the present case certainly does not rest upon the testimony of one, nor indeed of all taken together; but the facts which they have spoken to are, in many instances which I have detailed to you, and which I have observed upon as I went along, supported and confirmed by different persons unconnected with them, and who have been drawn from different parts and different places. In addition to that, you have some circumstances applicable to some particular prisoners, which do not depend at all upon that sort of testimony, I mean particularly the situation of the prisoner Haigh the very next day, applying to have a wound in his shoulder dressed and the way in which he was carried about till the time of his apprehension. With respect to the circumstance of the hat being found in the mill-stream, it is not proved whose hat it was by any of the people who found it; but it appears, not only by the testimony of the accomplice, who said he went home With Thomas Brook, that he was wet, and was without a hat, but also from the testimony of Naylor, that that same night, several people called and borrowed a hat, which hat was afterwards returned.

You will put all these circumstances together, and after the attention you have paid to this case, it will be for you to say, whether or not you are satisfied that these prisoners were of that party who began to demolish this mill; and if you are satisfied that the evidence fixes this crime upon any of the prisoners, as with respect to such against whom you think it defective, you will acquit them; as to the others, you will convict them, and if you think it does not apply to any of them you will acquit them all. If you find the account of the accomplices confirmed as to all which is more indeed than can be expected, they must all bear the fate of the same verdict. You will consider the case, and form any discrimination which in your judgment you think the case deserves.

The jury retired at six o'clock, and returned at seven, finding James Haigh, Jonathan Dean, John Ogden, Thomas Brook and John Walker,— GUILTY.

James Brook, John Brook, and John Hirst—NOT GUILTY.



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000263/18130125/012/0004

Sussex Advertiser - Monday 25 January 1813

THE EXECUTION AT YORK.

*From "The Leeds Mercury" of Saturday, January 16.*

About eleven o'clock in the morning, John Ogden, Nathan Hoyle, Joseph Crowther, John Hill, John Walker, Jonathan Dean, and Thomas Brook, were led from their cell to the place of execution; and after the usual devotional services, the dreadful sentence of the law was upon them. A few moments before the sentence of the law was executed, John Hill advanced to the front of the platform, and said, "Friends, all take warning by my fate; for three years I followed the Lord; but about half a year since I fell by little, and at last I am come to this. Oh, take warning!"

At half past one o'clock, soon after the dead bodies of the seven criminals above enumerated had been removed, John Swallow, John Balley `[Batley]`, Joseph Fisher, William Hartley, James Haigh, James Hay, and Job Hay, were led to the fatal tree, and after the usual time spent in prayer, the drop fell, and they were launched into eternity.

All the prisoners conducted themselves in a manner becoming their awful situation, and made a general confession of their guilt. The spectators, particularly at the execution in the morning, were unusually numerous; and large bodies of military, both horse and foot, guarded the entrance to the castle, and paraded the front of the place of execution. Not the, slightest disorder manifested itself amongst the populace.

The Special Commission at York, has, for the present, terminated in sittings, and we sincerely hope and pray that there may never be occasion to resume them: neither the Grand nor Petit Jury have been discharged, and the Court adjourned till Tuesday morning during pleasure. The Commission continues in force till the 1st of February—the dreadful result of these unhappy disturbances, which have so much afflicted, and so greatly disgraced certain manufacturing districts in the West Riding of the County of York. The result is indeed infinitely distressing; the numbers of persons executed is without parallel in the annals of this country, except in the rebellion of 1745. The shock produced by so unexampled an exercise of criminal justice, is not be described. We wish, and devoutly pray, that the blood of these unhappy men may not be shed in vain; but that it will induce all to avoid those illegal associations, which must sooner or later conduct them to an untimely death.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000239/18130126/008/0003
Manchester Mercury - Tuesday 26 January 1813

`[Gives a report along the lines of the Leeds Mercury report.]`

The following are the number of families left these unfortunate men, viz.—

John Ogden, wife and 2 children; Nathan Hoyle, wife and 7 children; Joseph Crowther, wife pregnant, and 4 children; John Hill, wife and 2 children; John Walker, wife and 5 children; Jonathan Dean, wife and 7 children; Thomas Brook, wife and 3 children; John Swallow, wife and 6 children; John Batley, wife and 1 child; John Fisher, wife and 3 children; Job Hay, wife and 7 children; William Hartley, (wife died half a year ago) 8 children; James Hay, wife and 2 chiidren; James Haigh, wife, but no children.

---

[L-C]John Ogden, wife and 2 children;
[R]Nathan Hoyle, wife and 7 children;
[R]Joseph Crowther, wife pregnant, and 4 children;
[R]John Hill, wife and 2 children;
[L-C]John Walker, wife and 5 children;
[L-C]Jonathan Dean, wife and 7 children;
[L-C]Thomas Brook, wife and 3 children;
[B]John Swallow, wife and 6 children;
[B]John Batley, wife and 1 child;
[B]John Fisher, wife and 3 children;
[R]Job Hay, wife and 7 children;
[R]William Hartley, (wife died half a year ago) 8 children;
[R]James Hay, wife and 2 chiidren;
[L-C]James Haigh, wife, but no children.

14+3 hanged

Children of the 14:
2+7+4+2+5+7+3+6+1+3+7+8+2 = 57 which appears to account for that oft quoted figure.

Attack on Cartwright's Mill:
    - guilty: James Haigh (w0), Jonathan Dean (w7), John Ogden (w2), Thomas Brook (w3), John Walker (w5);
    - not guilty: James Brook, John Brook, and John Hirst—NOT GUILTY.


John Swallow, John Batley, Joseph Fisher, John Lumb.
Burglary of Samuel Moxon at Whitley Upper, 3rd July.

Job Hey, John Hill, and William Hartley
The prisoners were indicted for a Burglary, at the house of George Haigh, at Skircoat, on the 29th of August last, and severally pleaded. Not Guilty.

James Hey, Joseph Crowther, and Nathan Hoyle.
For robbery of James Brook, in his Dwelling-house at Huddersfield, and for stealing in, the said dwelling-hoosey Brook beins therein, and being put in fear, on the 29th of November.


NG John Schofield. for shooting John Hinchliffe

G John Eadon - administering oath to Richard Howells 

NG John Eadon and Craven Cookson  administering oath to THomas Broughton


John Baines the elder, Charles Milnes, John Baines the younger, William Blakeborough, George Duckworth, and Zachariah Baines. administering oath to John Macdonald.

Joseph Brook - burglary against Bemjamin Strickland, October 4th.

[others for burglary]

Samuel Booth, George Brook, George Lodge, and Joshua Schofield [along with George Mellor, Thomas Smith, William Thorpe, Jonathan Dean, and John Walker] broken frames at Linley of John Hirst and James Balderstone on 23rd of February

Jambs Varley, Joseph Thornton, George Brooks, George Beaumont, Abraham Armitage, Samuel Haigh, Benjamin Hinchliffe, John Taylor and Robert Fitton, + Gorge Mellor, breaking into WIlliam Newton, Foolstone


---
https://ludditebicentenary.blogspot.com/2012/02/22nd-february-1812-attacks-on-shearing.html
22nd February 1812: Attacks on shearing frames at Marsh & Crosland Moor, near Huddersfield

Saturday night the 22nd February was to herald the commencement proper of Luddism in the West Riding of Yorkshire. From this night onwards and for several weeks, night-time raids would be made on shearing frames in 'cropping shops' around the areas of the Spen Valley & Huddersfield, the heartland of the West Yorkshire cloth finishing industry.

The Luddites initially assembled in a field at Rashcliffe at around 11 p.m., waiting until midnight to see who else had decided to take part in the raid that evening, with around 45 men eventually assembling. There was some debate about which nearby targets to select, with the large local establishment at Bradley Mills being rejected in favour of smaller workshops. The men were drilled, forming into three companies, with each man being given a number. Each man was disguised and some had brought firearms.

At Joseph Hirst's cropping shop at Marsh, work was still taking place when the Luddite vanguard arrived. Those in the front of the attack carried fire-arms and demanded entry. This being given, some of the group kept watch whilst those with hammers set about destroying 7 shearing frames and 24 pairs of conventional cropping shears. It was hard work and 2 attempts had to be made to ensure the destruction was fully complete.

The Luddites were in high spirits, with shots being fired and eventually windows broken although the leadership of the group quickly moved to put a stop to both. Some made threats against Hirst, but the leaders promised that no violence against his person would occur on this occasion, but if it were necessary for the Luddites to return, they would finish the job.

The party then moved off via Longroyd Bridge towards Crosland Moor and the premises of James Balderstone, whose business was a smaller affair, employing only one shearing frame. The house was in darkness, with Balderstone having retired to bed, so the Luddites had to force entry, which promptly awakened him. Balderstone threatened to shoot the intruders, but shortly afterwards, the Luddites broke the door down. Posting sentries outside whilst others held Balderstone and his wife at gunpoint, the remaining Luddites went upstairs to where the single shearing frame was located and smashed it to pieces. As with the raid on Hirst, 8 pairs of conventional cropping shears were also destroyed.

By 2.00 a.m. on the 23rd, the Luddites work was complete and they left, one of them firing a shot into the air.
This has been compiled from a report in the Leeds Mercury of 29th February 1812 and Brooke & Kipling (1993, pp.16-17).