


https://archive.org/details/cobbettscomplet14jardgoog/page/n540/mode/2up

Cobbett's complete collection of state trials and proceedings for high treason and other crimes and misdemeanors from the earliest period to the present time ... from the ninth year of the reign of King Henry, the Second, A.D. 1163, to ... [George IV, A.D. 1820]
by Thomas Bayly Howell , William Cobbett , David Jardine

Publication date 1809

cols. 1035-1063

Thundtiy^ TtkJamary^ 1813* Tre KtKO

John Schofield. ,Ibr fmiickmtfy $shooting of Jifhi Hinchliffe.

The indictment contained four counts; the two first framed on the Stat. 9. Geo. 1st c. 22. and the two last on the Stat. 48. Geo. 3rd c. 58. The first count charged, that the prisoner and a person unknown fired at Hinchliffe. The second count charged, that the person unknown fired at Hinchliffe, and that the prisoner was present aiding and abetting. The third count charged, that the person unknown fired at Hinchliffe with intent to murder him, and that the prisoner was present, counselling, aiding and abetting, and privy to the firing. The fourth count only differed from the third, in stating the intent to be to do some grievous bodily harm to Hinchliffe.

The prisoner having pleaded not guilty to this indictment, it was opened by Mr. Richardson.

TO DO

---

# Trial of John Schofield

 https://books.googleusercontent.com/books/content?req=AKW5QacVwedomjPxZF0XqkulxG35xgW-zTYvBYJSSM6PwlqQIgW7b9aq3c6Bp7yDv3qK1DX10T8z8mZicEXE766msvV_GplGGVVxdtGrTR1hJsIqNh2KvUiTWVMiMD1h_in4rDI2EhjrHwe74S27fxboqHLn1mo1Wp11icdTNWiv2oT2lEd8Ec0-xSYRvoW70_BLzcBuKMqJfhQzBQHcJBxOAgpxV3BEbbwWztrH6604e-VH1ev4C7Vy8MaPCmgQhdaJe9OckNeBNuNsL5m-j7QmHsO1n2JTrteMFsmm7P21mZMDSKG4xmQ
 
Report of proceedings under commissions of Oyer & Terminer and Gaol Delivery, for the county of York, held at the castle of York before Sir Alexander Thomson ... and Sir Simon Le Blanc ... from the 2d to the 12th of January 1813. From the short hand notes of Mr. Gurney. To which are subjoined two proclamations, issued in consequence of the result of those proceedings   pp74-
 
Thursday, 7th January 1813.
 
THE KING against John Schofield.
 
For maliciously shooting at John Hinchliffe. The indictment contained four counts; the two first framed on the Stat. 9 Geo. I. c. 22. and the two last on the Stat. 43 Geo. III. c. 58. 'The first count charged, that the prisoner and a person unknown fired at Hinchliffe. The second count charged, that the person unknown fired at Hinchliffe, and that the prisoner was present aiding and abetting. The third count charged, that the person unknown fired at Hinchliffe with intent to murder him, and that the prisoner was present, counselling, aiding and abetting, and privy to the firing. The fourth count only differed from the third, in stating the intent to be to do some grievous bodily harm to Hinchliffe.

The prisoner having pleadedNot Guilty to this Indictment, it was opened by Mr. Richardson.

Mr. Park. May it please your Lordships; Gentlemen of the Jury, The prisoner at the bar stands indicted before you, upon two different Acts of Parliament, one (which is commonly called the Black Act) passed in the reign of his Majesty King George the First, and the other in the present King's reign, in the year 1803. Probably this case will resolve itself more into the latter statute than the first.

Before I state the circumstances of this case, I will shortly state to you the law upon which the prisoner stands indicted; and the framer of the Act seems almost to have had in view, by the preamble of the statute, the disturbances which have taken place in this county lately. For the Act says- "Whereas divers cruel and barbarous outrages have been of late wickedly and wantonly committed in divers parts of England and Ireland, upon the persons of divers of his Majesty's subjects, either with intent to murder, rob, or to maim, disfigure or disable, or to do other grievous bodily harm to such subjects, be it enacted," (the words upon which the present indictment is framed) " That if any person shall wilfully, maliciously and unlawfully, shoot at any of his Majesty's subjects , or shall wilfully, maliciously and unlawfully present, point, or level, any kind of loaded fire-arms at any of his Majesty's subjects, and attempt, by drawing a trigger, or in any other manner to discharge the same at or against his or their person or persons," and then it goes on to state other crimes, with which I need not trouble you, " then and in every such case, the person or persons so offending, their counsellers, aiders, and abettors, knowing of, and privy to such  offence, shall be and are hereby declared to be felons, and shall suffer death as in cases of felony without benefit of clergy." This is the law upon which the prisoner stands indicted; and I need hardly state to you (because the point has been frequently stated during the present session) that the question is not so much, whether the prisoner at the bar himself, by his own hand, fired at this individual,John Hinchliffe, as, whether he and the person who did actually fire at John Hinchliffe, went thither with the unlawful purpose to do some bodily harm to him. For there are two counts in this indictment; one stating, that he went with intent to murder, and the other, that he went with intent to do some bodily harm.

Gentlemen, there are in these cases two main questions for the consideration of the Jury; first, whether the crime itself that is charged has been committed by any one; and if it be established that it has been committed by some one, then whether the person now charged before you has been guilty of that crime.

OfJohn Hinchliffe being wounded, there will remain no doubt. He is a person of respectable and decent situation in life, residing in Holmfirth in this county; besides being the parish clerk, he is a professional singer, teaching to the country people that art, and among the rest, he had the prisoner at the bar for his scholar. The prisoner had been learning for a considerable time, so that Hinchliffe was well acquainted with him. In the night of the 22d of July, the prosecutor, being in bed, was called to by a voice without his house, and desired to come out of the house. He will swear, that he immediately knew the voice to be the voice of the prisoner. He had had a very good mean of knowing his voice; and it is hardly necessary you should see the person who speaks to you, for you will equally know him by his voice, if you are acquainted with it. He was some time, being in the dead of night, before he would come out; however, at last he came out. I am not sure whether he slept on the ground-floor or not. As soon as he opened his door, he was immediately seized by two men armed with pistols, and dragged some considerable way from his house. There were two persons, neighbours of his, one of the name of Thomas Hinchliffe (no relation of his) and another of the name of Jonas Moody, living in another house, still nearer to him. When he had been dragged out of his house, it happened most providentially (for I have from the statement made to me, very little doubt that this person had a more evil intent than was afterwards accomplished) a horse without any rider trotted up, and alarmed these two men. They thought of course that somebody was upon it, and were immediately alarmed; upon which Hinchliffe, the prosecutor, escaped from them, and ran towards the house of his neighbour, Thomas Hinchliffe. Immediately on his doing so, the other man, who is not found, and whose name and person we know nothing about, presented his piece, and fired it off; and Hinchliffe has entirely lost his eye. He screamed out, and the two men fled. Thomas Hinchliffe got up; and the prosecutor having called out, that his eye was bruised to pieces, which it was, he was taken first into the house of Thomas Hinchliffe, and then into his own. This is the fact which has been committed : of that there can be no doubt, for the man will be examined before you.

The next question is, how is this brought home to Schofield the prisoner ? On that subject, I will minutely detail the evidence by which we propose to bring it home to him. In the case of all crimes of this sort, it is desirable, if it can be done, to find out à motive for the act. You will naturally enquire what motive there can be in this case. Here is a man living (as it should appear) on terms of intimacy with him, and why should he commit this outrage? for there is no attempt to rob his house, nor his person; indeed he had no clothes upon him.

Gentlemen, I am afraid there will be a motive most apparent.

This young man had joined a party of (what are called in that part of the country) Luddites. Some time previous to this offence, I believe so long before as the month ofMay, this young man met John Hinchliffe, and talked to him a considerable time. They walked together, and Schofield enquired of Hinchliffe, whether he would join the Luddites, and told him that he himself was enrolled in the society of Luds. He took a paper from his bosom, and read it to him, which contained words which he does not exactly recollect, but he will tell you they were to this effect: " In the name ofGod Almighty," and then, that " any brothers who informed of each other, were to be punished;" with a variety of words of that description, importing an engagement of secrecy. Schofield went on to tell him, that the kingdom was to rise; that they had got over a whole regiment; and a vast variety of particulars, which I shall not go into further. Hinchliffe immediately said, very properly, " I will have nothing to do with it;" and he was so uneasy about this, that he thought it his duty some time afterwards to communicate what had passed to two or three respectable persons in his parish. Whether they bruited this abroad or not, I do not know; but on the day or day but one before this offence happened, John Hinchliffe was called out of his bed at six in the morning, by the prisoner at the bar, who :wished him to take a walk in the fields with him, which he did; and the prisoner said, " Have not you disclosed to Blythe, the constable, what passed between us on such a day?"

He said, "I have not to Blythe, but I have to A. B. and C."

The prisoner said, "I do not know how I am to get over this:
 
I could get rid of every thing but the oath;" and so he went on, complaining. Gentlemen, when the outrage itself was committed, it will be proved to you, that the man who fired the pistol, said to Hinchliffe, "What have you been doing?

Hinchliffe answered, "I have done nothing of which I am ashamed." "Yes," said the other, "you have been declaring something about John Schofield."

Still it will be asked, how do you prove John Schofield was one of the party at this house? It will be proved to you by Hinchliffe, that he was perfectly acquainted with the voice that called upon him to come out; and that he knew the voice, at the time, to be the voice of Schofield. This man had something over his face, which appeared to be a light coloured handkerchief; and, some accident blowing the handkerchief aside, Hinchliffe immediately knew the man to be the prisoner, and he will swear to you that he has no doubt of that fact.

The prisoner at the bar is a married man, and has a child; he lived with his father, who is also, I believe, a married man.

He was a workman with his father, both as a farmer, and in his other business, whatever that was. The very morning after this outrage was committed, the prisoner set out from this county to London, leaving his wife and child behind; he fled, taking a very small quantity of clothes with him, as you will find proved. There was immediately a reward offered for his apprehension; he was described, and his dress described. The witness who will be called, will describe the kind of pantaloons, or long breeches, he had on at the time of the fact; that they were lead-coloured breeches. Immediately upon his person being described and his name given, an officer of the police at the Whitechapel Office in London, who will be called before you as a witness , went on board a ship destined for America, and found the prisoner. And it is due to the prisoner to say (for I will state every thing for him, that I know of, as well as against him) that he had not gone on board the ship under a false name. He was immediately asked, whether he came from Yorkshire, and he said, he did. He was asked, whether he knew a person of the name of John Hinchliffe, 'of Upper Thong; and he said, he had never heard of such  man in his life, He was asked to read the advertisement. He said, he had never heard that such a person had been shot at, before he left Yorkshire; though it will appear in evidence, that he left Yorkshire the morning after. He said, I have no doubt I am the person here described, for this is my description; upon which the officer said, "I must take you before Sir Daniel Williams," one of
 
After this, on a request from the magistrates in Yorkshire in consequence of a description of the handkerchief with which Schofield's face was disguised, the police officer went on board the ship again, and opened his trunk, the key of which the prisoner gave him; and in that trunk the very handkerchief was found. He had on a pair of lead-coloured pantaloons at the time of his apprehension; they did not appear to be very new; but he was asked, where he got them; and he said, he had bought them since he came to London, at a shop; he was naturally asked, where that shop was; his answer was, "O,

Ido not know the name of the people, but I could shew it with the greatest ease, it is near the London Docks." The officer afterwards solicited him to point out the shop, and he could point out no such shop; and the officer went to three or four shops, but could not find that any such article had been sold to anyone. And there is a decisive fact, with respect to these pantaloons; if he had bought new pantaloons in London, the old ones with which he left the country, would probably have been in his possession; but there were none such. :

The prisoner was examined before the police magistrate in London, which becomes material, lest there should be any idea of fallacy in the memory of the witness, as to his not knowing John Hinchliffe of Upper Thong. In this examination, John Schofield says, "I come from Nether Thong, in Yorkshire;" and so on. "I am a farmer; I worked with my wife's father, Samuel Jagger, who has a farm at NetherThong, which place I left a fortnight since to-morrow, " In another part, he says, "I set off from Nether Thong on Thursday morning, the 23d of July." The deed was done on the 22d. "I do not know any such person as John Hinchliffe of Upper Thong.

I did not hear that he had been shot at, before I left the country." Now if he did not know such a person as John Hinchliffe ofUpper Thong, it was right he should say so; but if he did know him, and had done no injury to him, what motive could there be for his concealing the fact; and when he came into Yorkshire, you will find he admitted the fact.

Before the magistrate in London, who knew nothing of him, and who, he thought would never find out the truth of the fact, he denied it; but being examined afterwards in Yorkshire, where the facts were better known, he said, " I am well acquainted with John Hinchliffe, of Wickens, in Upper Thong;

I have been with him many hundred times singing, he taught me to sing." So that here is a direct contradiction between the one examination and the other; and I read them to you for the purpose of shewing that contradiction. The first examination was taken before Sir Daniel Williams, so early as the 5th of August 1812, the act having been committed on the 22d of July; and the second examination taken of course when he was brought into the county of York. These are the corroborating circumstances of the case.

I am told, Gentlemen, and I mention every thing that I am aware can be stated (because it is right to the prisoner, as well as to the public, that it should be stated) I am told, it is to be said, But John Hinchliffe of Upper Thong did not always tell the same story; when he was first examined about it, he did not mention this man. I dare say that is true, but he could not have been long in mentioning him, for he was apprehended on the 5th ofAugust, in London. But it is extremely probable, such was the danger and apprehension of every body in this county at the time, particularly people living in that part of the county, and unprotected as this poor man seems to be, that these people should be afraid of speaking out, till they found they were under the protection of the government, or the military. But you are to judge, as in all cases you must, as to his degree of credit, in the circumstances under which he made the concealment. I am also told, we are to have an attempt in this case to establish an alibi; that is, that the prisoner was in another situation at the time of the fact being committed. I believe none of you sat in that place yesterday, when every thing upon that subject was most accurately stated; but you know,Gentlemen, that the thing depends very much upon the accuracy of the prosecutor's memory. You will remember, when these facts were committed, that this man was waked out of the dead of sleep, and did not know the time; and if it stood upon that only, the man might be mistaken as to half an hour, or an hour. I believe it will turn out, that in the evidence of the witnesses for the prosecution in this case, the account of one as to time will materially differ from the account of the other, and yet there was but one time at which it was committed. That the fact was committed, there will be no doubt, no man will dispute that fact, but the time, I believe, will be stated differently; but does not the clock of one neighbour differ from the clock of another ? and is it to be expected, that the clocks of all persons in this situation of life should agree ? You will attend to the evidence of the persons called to prove this alibi, and will consider whether they may not be mistaken; and when you find differences of a quarter of an hour or half an hour, it is impossible that such evidence alone can afford a good defence. All these are circumstances for your consideration. I only draw your attention to them, because, by the proceedings in this case, it is not open to me, nor is there a necessity, for my addressing you further. These I understand to be the grounds of the defence. I shall call my witnesses, and prove the facts I have opened; and if I prove them satisfactorily to your minds, it will be your duty to  to find the prisoner at the bar guilty of the charge imputed to him by this indictment.

The first witness called was the prosecutor, John Hinchliffe; who proved the previous conversations with the prisoner in May, and on the 20th ofJuly, as stated by Mr. Park; and that, on the night of the 22d ofJuly he was called out of bed, and on opening his door, was seized by two men, both armed with pistols, who dragged him out of the fold before his house, saying at the same time, that they would not hurt him, but wanted him to shew them the way some where; that, being alarmed by the passing of a stray horse, one of the two men (whom he swore to be the prisoner) ran away; that the man who remained, asked the prosecutor, what he had been doing; to which the prosecutor answered, that he had done nothing amiss to any man; that the assailant said he was a liar, and had fetched a warrant against John Schofield; that the prosecutor replied, he never had, and had never been before a magistrate in all his life on that business or any other; that the stranger then whistled, upon which the prosecutor ran towards Thomas Hinchliffe's house, and the stranger fired and wounded the prosecutor; and that this conversation was the whole which passed, between the running away of Schofield, and the shot being fired.

As soon as John Hinchliffe had concluded his evidence, it being understood that this was the whole proof going to the gist of the crime, the prisoner's Counsel took objections to the indictment.

Mr. Hullock-I submit to your Lordships, that the facts given in evidence do not support the indictment, upon either of the statutes. I understood in the opening, that circumstances to shew a malicious motive were intended to be given in evidence; but no such circumstances have been given in evidence at all. There is no fact before your Lordships, to prove that, antecedently to the man firing the pistol, any malice or ill will, or any sentiment of that description, had existed in the mind of the prisoner at the bar towards the prosecutor; and the very last words, except stating that they wanted to enquire the residence of a man, were, from one or other of the two men, (he does not know from which) that they would do him no harm. I submit, there is no evidence here of that mind, which must constitute an offence in this individual. Perhaps it may be contended, that although this man was not corporaily present, yet in legal intendment he might be considered as legally present. But I submit, there ought to be previous evidence of malice, in order to warrant the conclusion drawn by this indictment. There is not one particle of proof yet given, and I apprehend none can be given, that this individual either had threatened or intended any harm of any description  before this time. The only circumstance from which any inference can be drawn, is, that these two individuals had pistols; and my learned Friend having alluded to the situation and state of that part of the country, I may do the same. It is too melancholy a truth, that at that period the whole of that country, almost, was armed with that species of weapon. But, because this man was called up under these circumstances,

I submit, in an indictment for a capital felony, it is too much to state, that there is any evidence to go to the Jury to sustain this indictment.

Mr. Williams. I trust your Lordships will excuse my following my learned friend, Mr. Hullock; and it shall be precisely upon that point he has submitted to your Lordships; that is to say, whether the charge, as laid, is made out at all; and not whether there is any evidence for the Jury to comment upon. And, my Lords, I apprehend that there can be no argument raised against us from the language of the BlackAct, as stronger, or as more powerful, than the language of the latter Act : but that upon each, this case must resolve itself simply into this; whether or not this man was, at the time, in point of law, a principal felon, or an accessary in the first degree, aiding and abetting at the fact ? That certainly is the question; because these large and general words, counselling, aiding and abetting, are mere formal descriptions of the intent and meaning of law; they are the legal periphrasis for the shorter phrase, accessary to the fact in the first degree. And I apprehend, that it makes not a tittle of difference, whether these words are there or not , for I could not contend before your Lordships, that, supposing there is a new felony created, all the incidents of felony would not follow; and therefore I apprehend, that these words being there, do in no degree make the case weaker or stronger; and consequently, that the same rule applies to both statutes.

Now, myLords, what is the rule in these cases? I apprehend, that the rule is plainly this; that if the party does not himself do the act, in order for him to be bound, the act of his fellow must be done in prosecution of the original design in which they set out. I presume that my learned friend, who is of Counsel for the Crown, assents to me in that point. If he does not, I shall be glad to hear in what it is that he disagrees with that proposition. I apprehend that that is the rule; and it is with a view to that rule, that we are to enquire precisely, whether there is evidence in this case. I shall not waste your

Lordships time upon that point. My learned friend, Mr. Hullock, has drawn your attention to the fact; and I will take leave very shortly to remind your Lordships of some cases which have been decided, with a view to illustrate what the law is.

M

My Lords, I recollect in Mr. Serjeant Hawkins's Treatise upon the Pleas of the Crown, he lays down this (and I mention it not as a case in point, but as illustrating my principle) upon the subject of unlawful assemblies : He puts the case of a large assembly of persons, who as to numbers, and as to the quality of their meeting in general, would, in point of law, clearly be rioters, supposing they had no intent to explain away that illegal purpose. I mean a meeting of persons at a fair; a meeting of persons at a market; a meeting in any other way, where the number of persons would be sufficient to constitute a riot, unless there was some other meaning. I will suppose an election, which is a case somewhat stronger, and where there is a degree of latitude allowed which there is in no other. What does Mr. Serjeant Hawkins say upon that ?

Supposing two me fall out and fight, or three, or four, that does not constitute any riot. Why not? Because it is a distinct act, collateral to and independent of the original purpose; because the other persons are not to be fixed with an act, which is by the bye, which is collateral, which does not spring out of the original design, but is a simple and individual act of the party, who himself is guilty of it, and who is therefore the only person answerable for it; but he does not contaminate or affect any person by-standing. Let me, with great humility, apply this doctrine. What does my learned Friend say is the purpose in this case? I leave that to him. I will suppose that it was some felonious purpose; that is of course, or the indictment could not be sustained. He has stated it to be to shoot. My learned friend, Mr. Hullock, has already commented upon the fact. I will only remind your Lordships, with a view to apply what I have taken leave, with great humility, to state, that in point of fact the party had actually gone away, was clearly removed, from the spot. The person supposed to be the prisoner being removed, and an altercation actually arising between the other man who was left, and who committed the deed, and the prosecutor, that other man after that time, and not until the man now before your Lordships (if it was he) was withdrawn from the spot, independently, individually, of his own malice and wantonness, fired the shot.

This man being in no shape or way present, countenancing or directing the other to do the act, but being too far removed todo any thing of that description; then in point of fact is the evil act done, which is the subject of the prosecution.

With great deference to your Lordships, I will put one other case; and having done that, I will trespass no further upon your Lordships' time. In Mr. East's book, there is a case of some persons going to rob an orchard, four or five I think were concerned in the case. One of the party, without that purpose, independently of that purpose, for no reason connected with that purpose, or necessary for the prosecution of it (and, my Lords, I keep distinctly within the rule which I take to be the question here, whether the thing was done in the prosecution of an original plan), fired a shot at a person and killed him. It was held individual murder. Why?

Because he did the act of his own will, it being unnecessary for the prosecution of the general purpose which the five had in view, and therefore he answered individually, and the four were held blameless. That is the way in which I, with great deference, and upon very general recollection (for I have not had an opportunity of looking at the cases), do with great humility submit to your Lordships, that the act of the man who fired the shot was his individual act, after the purpose (whatever it was) for which the two were united, was at an end. : me

Mr. Brougham. After the full and able way in which my learned Friend has argued this question, it only remains for m in one single sentence to remind your Lordships of the point.

The corpus delicti cannot be varied by the evidence to be given, but all which is to be done, is more fully to identify the prisoner.

The question therefore is, whether (admitting, for the sake of argument, the person who went away before the act committed, to be the prisoner) whether any thing is proved, sufficient to authorize your Lordships to let it go to the Jury, he not having been present at the time, and not having assisted in the act; whether any evidence, now given, is sufficient of his having come thither with an intent, which intent may appear from the facts to have given rise to that act, not committed by him who was absent, but by the person who remained. We submit to your Lordships, that the facts do not merely not prove that, but that they negative it as far as they go. The facts are, that this person (whom, for argument sake, we take to have been the prisoner) came with an unknown person; that being there, they entered into a conversation with the prosecutor; that in the course of that conversation the prosecutor expressed some alarm, which was quieted by some expressions by one or both of them, and that he then acceded to the lawful request of going out to shew them the way to some person's house; that when they were so going, a noise happened, that induced the one person to go away; and that after a certain interval had elapsed, the other person did some unlawful act; and we submit, there is no evidence fixing that other person, who had gone away, with an intent to do that unlawful act.

Mr. Baron. Thomson.-The Counsel for the prisoner have done their duty, in endeavouring to raise any objections which they could on his behalf. But as far as those objections meet my understanding, I think there is no foundation for

M 2 the  them. It has been suggested, first, that in order to bring this offence within either of the Acts of Parliament, it is necessary to shew some previous malice, to shew that this was a malicious act. Certainly no such evidence is requisite in any of these cases, because the act itself sufficiently imports malice, unless an explanation of that act can be given; and it is no more than in the case of murder, which necessarily implies the act to be maliciously done. No prepense malice is necessary to be proved; in many cases it cannot; but *res ipsa loquitur*. And so it is here. Supposing the prisoner to be the person (and it has been admitted, for the sake of the argument, that he was the companion of the man who fired), the question is then, whether there are circumstances here involving him in that guilt, which it is clearly admitted , attaches upon the other ? It is stated that there are none such. That ought to be left to the Jury for their consideration.

Now see what the evidence has been, as far as it has at present gone. The other man, and the prisoner at the bar (taking him to be the man) go together, at the dead of night, armed with pistols, to the house of the prosecutor, who is in bed; they knock at his door, and call him up, asking if he lives there: and when he comes to the door, and asks them what they want, they tell him that they want him to shew them their way to a man (avery idle account of their errand, not saying what man they wanted him to shew them the way to); but they proceed further, and actually lay hold of him by each arm, and he is in that way brought out of his house. They tell him, indeed, that they do not mean to do him any harm; but what they said is certainly no evidence of their not having any such intention. The prisoner at the bar stays there during the time that I have related: a noise is discovered of the trotting of a horse, upon which the prisoner (hearing it, I suppose, for the prosecutor heard it) runs away. As soon as he is gone, a conversation takes place between the other man and the prosecutor, and which conversation is applicable entirely to the prisoner; it is a very short one; there is no altercation at all, no quarrel arising at that time between the prosecutor and the other man after the prisoner is gone; but there are a very few questions, which shew decisively the purpose for which that man at least had come; and it will be for the Jury to say, whether the prisoner had not accompanied him for the same purpose, and from the same motives. For as soon as he was gone, the man asked the prosecutor what he had been doing, and this all with relation to the prisoner; he said he had been doing nothing amiss; that man immediately replied, that he had been fetching a warrant againstJohn Schofield; and it is in evidence, that Schofield himself, only I think two days before this, was apprehensive (for that appears from the conversation, that he had had with th the Prosecutor) that a legal information had been laid against him; he inquires about it, and is very anxious to know whether the prosecutor had related to the constable and to the other persons, the conversation that had passed between him (Schofield) and the prosecutor, relative to Luddism, and that he had been anxious to swear the prosecutor into that strange and wicked fraternity. He was then afraid, as appears from the evidence of the prosecutor, that such an information had been laid, and indeed the prosecutor told him he had related that conversation, not to Blythe the constable, but to other persons whom he named. The prisoner, Schofield, expressed his apprehensions, that in consequence of that he should be sent to York, for that Blythe had threatened to get him sent there. Now, after the prisoner, Schofield, had run away, having accompanied this other man to the prosecutor's, and assisted inlaying hold of him by the arm, nothing more passed between the prosecutor and the other man, than what I have now related, namely, the inquiry whether he had not given information against Schofield, and the telling him he was a liar when he said that he had not, before the other man immediately set up a whistle, the prosecutor ran off, and as he ran that other man shot him. Surely, here are facts, and facts enough to be left to the Jury, in my opinion, that what that other man did was in consequence of their concert and agreement to come together to this place to do this act. They come at the dead of night armed with pistols, they enter into conversation with the prosecutor, they endeavour to get him out of his house, the one taking him on the one side, and the other on the other; and it will be for the Jury to say, whether the reason assigned of his shewing them some person, whom they did not name, was not an idle pretence for getting him out to use one of these pistols: and one was used, which happily had not the effect of depriving him of his life, but deprived him of his eye-sight. In the view I have of this case, and consistently with all the circumstances, there is enough to go to the Jury; that they both went together for this purpose, and that this act was in consequence of previous concert on the part of both; and if the prisoner left the other man only in consequence of his taking alarm, on the horse trotting up, it appears to me he must be considered as aiding and abetting, if the Jury shall. be of opinion that they did their endeavour to get the man out of the house, for the purpose of using the pistols. It appears to me there. is enough in this case, as it now stands, to be left to the Jury for their consideration.

Mr. JusticeLeBlanc.-The manner, and the stage, at which this objection is brought before the Court, calls upon them to decide, in some degree, upon a supposition as to what the opinion of the Jury maybe upon the facts. With respect to the legal authorities which have been stated by the Counsel on the part of the prisoner, I agree with them; but it is in the application of those legal authorities to the present case, that I think they are not correct. In the present stage of the proceeding, the question is, whether, supposing all the facts that have already come out, to be true, and supposing that which hereafter is urged on the part of the prosecution to be made out, if it shall be made out that the prisoner was with that unknown person; whether, in any light in which the Jury, consistently with their duty, may view the case, the prisoner can be said to fall within the meaning of the Statutes under which he is indicted?

I do not think, in point of law, there is much difference between the one Statute and the other; but, taking it upon the last Statute, the 43d of the King, which is more express in stating that the parties shall maliciously fire, with intent to kill or to wound, and that persons aiding and abetting, privy to the design, shall be equally culpable with the man who executes it; it will be brought to two questions. The first will be, whether these two persons came with an innocent design, or not; and what their design was, must be collected, not merely from the expressions they used, but from the time at which they came, from the manner in which they were armed, from the language which had been used by the one of them to this party a few days before, and the conversation which appears afterwards to have been followed up by the man who actually fired, shortly after the other had run away; whether, from these circumstances, the Jury shall infer that this man, at that time of night, came upon an innocent purpose of merely asking the wa to a man's house, whom he did not name, or whether the two came for the purpose of doing this prosecutor some bodily injury. If the Jury shall be satisfied that their purpose was purely inquisitive, without any illegal intent, the verdict may be one way; but if they shall be of opinion, that they came for the purpose of injuring  man, who had made a discovery dangerous to one of them, then it will become a question, whether the man, who had run off in consequence of the alarm of a horse coming, can be said to be present, aiding and abetting? Taking it to be satisfactorily proved, to the minds of those who are ultimately to judge of it, that their purpose in coming was to do mischief, it is not by one of the parties running away at the instant of the act, and before the piece is fired, that he can extricate himself from the consequence of his companion's act.. With respect to the intent with which it is done, in none of these cases is an express wicked intent, or malice, necessary to be proved; the intent follows from the act itself; and if the necessary consequence of the act done, namely, the necessary con sequence  sequence of firing a pistol at  man, is, that if it hits him, it shall wound him, or do him a bodily injury, the man who fires it at him, of course, does it with intent to do him some bodily injury. It appears to me, therefore, that we should not be justified in stopping the case in the present stage, but that the proper course will be, to let it go to the Jury, who must ultimately decide it. What the other facts may be, or what the result maybe, it is not for me to intimate in the least degree.

The rest of the Evidence for the prosecution having been received, and the prisoner having called witnesses to prove that he was at home at the time when the shot was fired, the whole was summed up by

Mr. Baron THOMSON.

Gentlemen of the Jury, up.

THISindictment charges the prisoner at the bar with having Mr. Baron been guilty of a capital felony. The indictment is framed upon Thomson's twoActs ofParliament, made in the same matter, and which Acts of Parliament are levelled against the offence of any person shooting at another. An earlyAct in the reign ofKing George the First, had made it a capital offence for any person to shoot at another. The construction upon that Act always has been, that the shooting, to bring it within the offence against which the Act was made, must be such a shooting, as, if pursued with effect, would make the fact amount to the crime of murder.

The other Act is rather an extension, bywords more full than those of the former Act, to that which was the object of such former Act. It is made a capital offence (among other things) for any person to shoot with any instrument, loaded gun, or pistol, at any other, with intent to murder, er to do any personal injury or bodily harm to that other person; and it declares all persons principals, not only who shall shoot, but who shall be present, aiding, abetting and counselling the fact.

Upon these Acts of Parliament the indictment is founded; and the charge in the first count is, that the prisoner, and another man unknown, shot, at this prosecutor, of the name of Hinchliffe. It is varied only in this respect, that the charge in the second count of the indictment alleges, that a person unknown shot at Hinchliffe, and that the prisoner being present was aiding, abetting, and counselling that person unknown in shooting at him. The two other counts are founded on the more recent Statute; and in order to bring the offence within its purview, the third count charges, in so shooting at him, an intent to murder; and the fourth count, an intent to do some bodily harm toHinchliffe. These are the only differences.

There can be no doubt, and I do not leave it to you as a question at all, whether the prosecutor, Hinchliffe, did receive an  85 THE KING AGAINST

Mr. Baron injury of this description from the hand of some person or other;

Thomson's and it is not pretended that the prisoner at the bar was the hand that actually fired. The questions, therefore, for your consideration will be, first, whether he was the person who was present with the other man at the time that this act was committed : I do not mean literally when the pistol was firing, but whether the prisoner was the person who went with the other with pistols, in the way you have heard described; and if he was that person, then, whether he went with an intent to execute with the other that fact which the other did execute.

In support of this indictment, John Hinchliffe has stated, that he lives at Wickens, in the township of Upper Thong. He is a woollen manufacturer, and had been parish clerk of Holmfirth not quite a year. He has known the prisoner, Schofield, many years; they got acquainted with regard to music, Hinchliffe being a little in the habit of teaching persons to sing, and the prisoner being one of the persons whom he taught. These were questions put, to let one see how far he knew his voice; and he says, that from having taught him to sing, and occasionally meeting him at other times, he became well acquainted with his voice. He says, that he has lived in that neighbourhood himself either six or seven years; that he is married, and has six children, who, in July last, all lived with him. Jonas Moody was his next-door neighbour, and Thomas Hinchliffe lived next to Moody. It seems these three houses of theirs were all under one roof. There is a fold before each of the houses, and a road before the fold. In July, the prisoner lived at Lower Thong, about a mile from Wickens, and he has lived there ever since the witness knew him. Upon the 22d of July, the witness went to bed, with his family, between ten and eleven. In the night somebody came and knocked at his door, he thinks between eleven and twelve, but he says he has no clock. Most probably you all know with how much uncertainty people in the country speak of time, when they have no clock to goby; and indeed, how frequently it happens, even in moderate houses, where there isa clock, that is not always at the right time of the day; so that persons speaking of the time of the day, at different places, may speak very differently indeed.

The voice called out, "Does John Hinchliffe live here? " He was waked with this noise, and said "Yes;" and he says that he knew the voice that called out so, and it was the prisoner John Schofield's; and that he has no doubt about it in his mind. He says he got up and went to the door, just as he got out of his bed; he opened the door; he found at the door two persons, both of whom had pistols in their hands, and had hats on, and one of them had over his face what appeared to the witness to be a handkerchief of a light colour. He made an attempt to shut his door again, when he saw the pistols, but could not. A voice spoke, and said, they would not hurt  him. They both fastened their arms on his shirt (he being Mr. Baron quite naked, except a shirt) one on one side, and the other Thomson's on the other. He told them they would hurt him; they said they would not; and they asked the road to a man, not mentioning the name of any man. Just at this time a horse came up the lane, trotting. Schofield (as he calls him) had a handkerchief over his face, which was accidentally drawn on one side, so that he swears he saw part of his face; that he knew his person, and he saw so much of his face as to know it was his. He says it was very light, the moon being near the full. Schofield, on the horse coming up, ran away. After Schofield ran away, he cannot tell how far, the man that was left asked him what he had been doing. He said he had been doing nothing amiss to any man. The man said he was a liar, and that he had been fetching a warrant against John Schofield.

The witness said that he never had; that he never was before a Magistrate in all his life, on that business, or any other. He says this was all that passed, after the first man had taken to his heels, and it took up a very short time; that then the man, who was left, whistled, and he himself set off, and ran towards his neighbour, Thomas Hinchliffe's, and the man who remained, fired at him, and he was struck in his left eye'; he cried out with all his might; the man ran away, and he himself was let into his neighbour Thomas Hinchliffe's house He then says, that in the month of May preceding, he had seen Schofield (this was in July, you will recollect), it might be ten weeks before; that he saw him in Upper. Thong Lane, when the witness was going home from Holmfirth Chapel, on a

Sunday, between five and six in the afternoon; that Schofield overtook him on the road, and said he was going to get some drinking with him; that was about half a mile from his house; that when they came to a turn in the road, Schofield wanted him to go with him a different road from that which led to his own house; and he accordingly went with him to a place called Wickens Dyke, two or three hundred yards, when Schofield asked him, if he was a Ludd; that he said "No;" and Schofield asked, "would I be one?" the witness says he said "No;" but Schofield took a paper from a breast pocket, and began reading to him from that paper. He remembers the name of God Almighty being introduced, and about a society, and what would happen to any one who declared what passed. He says the prisoner told him they were wanting to get a body of men within the Liberty of Holmfirth; that they had got one at Huddersfield, and wanted to get a body of men in all places, and then it might be settled in a moment; and every place might do its own, and overturn theGovernment. You, Gentlemen, will bear in mind all the while, it is not for any offence of this kind; not for any of this seditious conduct, that the prisoner is now trying. HowN ever,  ever, he stated to the witness, that he had been upon that Thomson's business that morning, and was going to a meeting then, and there would be men from Manchester, and different places, at ... the meeting. He said two delegates were to be fixed, to go to London, to the House of Commons, to see what they could do there; that there was a regiment of soldiers twisted in *, all but one serjeant, officers and all, and four of the Queen's Bays too.

Then they parted, and the witness went to his house. This was in May, about ten weeks before this fact which we are now enquiring into, took place. Then, he tells you, that on the 20th of July, two days before this fact was committed, he again saw the prisoner; that he came to his house at Wickens, in the morning, it might be between six and seven; that he was in bed, and his family was up; that the prisoner asked him, if he was not for getting up, and the witness got up directly; the prisoner said he wanted to speak to him, he wanted him to go out with him, which he did, into a field. Then the prisoner asked him, whether he had declared what he (the prisoner) had said to him, for he had heard the witness had declared it to Mr. Blythe (who it seems is constable of Holmfirth); and that Blythe had declared, that as soon as York Assizes were over, he would have him (Schofield) taken up, and sent to York. Castle, and that he should remain imprisoned there for six months, if he got nothing else. The witness said he had not told Mr. Blythe (and he tells you this was a fact), but that he had told a Mr. Keeling, and several other persons, whose names he mentioned. Schofield, upon this, said it was a very bad job, if he had told them about the paper, that is, the paper which you will recollect he had pulled out, containing the Oath.

The witness said that he had told, and then the prisoner said he did not know which way it could be gotten over; he said his life was in the witness's hands, and that it would not be amiss to tell a lie, and swear it, to get him off. At that time they parted. He saw nothing of him after this till the 22d, when he received the wound. He now speaks to the person of the prisoner, partly from the observation he made of his voice; the only opportunity he had of taking notice of his person, was in consequence of the handkerchief being on one side, and the whole of the face not being covered.

Ile says, on his cross-examination (and that certainly is so) that he has not always given the same account as to his knowledge of the persons. He says, that on the next day, when he was examined before the Magistrates, he was ill; he was * It will be satisfactory to the well-disposed part of the * community, to be informed that this was mere gascanade, for which there was no foundation whatever.  was so ill, as perhaps lhe might think he should die, and he Mr. Baron did think he was in danger of death. He was examined before two Magistrates, but could not recollect every thing; and that is the reason, he tells you, why he did not then mention every thing he has now mentioned respecting his knowledge of either of the persons. He fancies that there was the same in the examination then taken, that he has said to-day, but that he has now related rather more, for that at that time he did not recollect every thing. You will consider, whether the injury he had received, had for a time taken away his power of recollection, or not; or whether he was intimidated. He has not gone the length of saying that he was intimidated. All that he says is, that he did pot recollect every thing. The account, he says, was taken before Mr. Scott and Mr, Armytage; the first appears to have been taken before Mr. Scott, on the very day, and the second afterwards, on that same day, before Mr. Scott and Mr. Armytage. Ile says he cannot tell how long these Magistrates were with him; that they went to Blythe's house, where he was, for the purpose of taking his examination; he was then in bed, and the examination was written by Mr. Scott; it was read to him, and he signed it. It might be three weeks or a month after the 22d, before he mentioned Schofield being one of the persons. The fact is, that the Magistrates never heard him mention his knowledge of Schofield being one of the persons, till the time that the prisoner was examined after he had been apprehended and brought back, which was on the 31st of August; and he says, that before that time he certainly told every person that asked him, that he did not know the persons; but he says now, that at the time he did know that Schofield was one of them, but that when he was before the Magistrates, his recollection and faculties were not complete.

Gentlemen, they then proceed (after some objection taken in point of law to this indictment, and to the evidence in support of it, which I was of opinion was not valid, and accordingly over-ruled) to call other witnesses. Thomas Hinchliffe stated, that he is a neighbour to John Hinchliffe the prosecutor, and lives, as the other had described, under the same roof; that he heard a noise; that at first he could make nothing of it, he thinks there were two voices; he knew John Hinchliffe's voice, and heard him say "Witness to any body," and then he heard a fire-piece go off, and he heard him say, " Tom, Tom, Tom, there is  man has shot my eye out."

He got up as soon as he could, and unlocked the door, and let him in. John Hinchliffe said, " My eye is bruised all to bits," and he bled hard. This, he says, according to his time, by his clock, was half-past eleven, or better. His clock N2 he  he looked at by moonlight. It seems it was a very light night, being about the full of the moon.

Francis Freeman is an officer at the Whitechapel Office in London. He says, in consequence of a hand-bill, which had been made very general, offering a reward for the discovery of the offender in this transaction, on the 5th of August he went on board an outward-bound American ship, The Independent, of New York, and on board he found the prisoner Schofield.

The ship was in the London Docks. He asked him if his name was John Schofield. He said it was. He asked him how long he had left the country; and he said about a fortnight.

He asked him what part of Yorkshire he came from; the prisoner said Nether Thong, near Huddersfield. So that the account he gave of himself so far was a true account, admitting that he was John Schofield, that he had lived in Nether Thong, and that he had left that part of the country about a fortnight before. Freeman asked him if he knew any person besides himself, of the name of John Schofield; and he said there was nobody of that name but his father. Freeman asked him if he knew John Hinchliffe, of that neighbourhood (and this is a material fact for your attention); he said he did not, nor had ever heard of the name of John Hinchliffe. He then shewed him the hand-bill.. He said that was his name, and likewise the place he had left; but he did not know the name ofHinchliffe.

He says he told him, that under the circumstances he must have him before Sir Daniel Williams, the Magistrate; and he observed his dress was exactly as described in the hand-bill, which he shewed the prisoner. This amounts to proving that John Schofield was the person taken up, and was the John Schofield who came from Nether Thong. He describes his dress that he had on, a blue coat and light-coloured jean pantaloons. He asked him, in the way to the Magistrate, whether his family knew the passage he was going to take to America. He said they did, and that his wife's uncle lived in America, and, in consequence of some letters written to his father, wishing him to come over, he was going; that his uncle was a grocer and farmer, and he thought he could do better there than here; that there had been a letter, about six months before, from his uncle in

America. This witness further says, that, in consequence of some directions he received from the country, he went on board again to search for a light handkerchief; that he searched a trunk, of which the prisoner had furnished him with the key; the prisoner did not go on board with him, but told him where the trunk was, and told him to bring the apparel he found in it,

There certainly was a very small quantity of clothes for a voyage of that description, one handkerchief, one shirt, and two pair of stockings. He kept possession of the handkerchief, and let  let Schofield have the other trifling things again. The prisoner Mr. Baron. said he had purchased the pantaloons at a shop near theLondon Thomson's Docks; but, after his examination, he said he should not know the shop again.

They then called a gentleman, who was clerk to Sir Daniel Williams, one of the Magistrates at the Police Office Whitechapel, London, who proves the prisoner's examination taken before the Magistrate, which is to this effect:-He says, " My name is John Schofield, I come from Nether Thong in Yorkshire, I am a farmer; I worked with my wife's father, Samuel Jagger, who has a farm at Nether Thong, which place I left a fortnight since to-morrow. I walked to Leicester, and came up to London in a coach called the Nelson, which took me up a little before I came to Leicester. I worked with my father John Schofield, who is a cloth-weaver at Nether Thong. It is about five years since I worked at that trade. Since that time I worked as a farmer. I have a wife and one child, who are at her father's at Nether Thong. I was going to New York, to a relation of mine, an uncle, whose name is George Hirst, and who keeps a shop there; his father is a farmer, and lives at Greeth, in the township of Nether Thong. My uncle never wrote me any letter inviting me to come to New York. He wrote a letter a few months back to his father, desiring me to come over to him. I brought about ten guineas, in paper money, with me. I was to pay fifteen guineas for my passage to New York. The other five I had from my relation,

Mr. Blackburn, woollen-draper, in Aldgate, where I have slept since my arrival in London, which was last Monday week.

My chest is on shipboard; I have no objection to have it examined. I have no objection to go down to Yorkshire to clear myself. I set off from NetherThong on Thursday morning the 23d ofJuly; " and it was certainly so from what the father says, that he went away some time or other on that morning, the 23d ofJuly. Then he says, " I do not know any such person as John Hinchliffe, of Upper Thong. I did not hear that he had been shot, before Ileft the country; I did not know that he had been shot;" he repeats it. "I set off myself, and came alone all the way to London. I brought up with me two shirts and three pair of stockings; I did not mean to have any more until I got to America. I bought the lead-coloured pantaloons I have on, at some house near the London Docks.

I can shew any one where I gave eight shillings for them; the person gave me change for a one-pound note. " This is the substance of that information which has been taken.

They then call Joseph Scott, Esq. a Magistrate of this county, who states, That the prisoner was examined before him, upon the 31st of August. Mr. Scott also states, on being cross-examined, that he took the examination of the prosecutor  prosecutor on the 23d of July: that he was sent for to the Thomson's place where the prosecutor was lying, at Blythe's, the constable of Holmfirth. Mr. Armytage accompanied him. He says, he thinks they arrived there about half-past eleven; that the prosecutor was in bed, and appeared to be in a dangerous state; that he entered into conversation with him; he appeared to be impressed with a considerable degree of fear (that is the appearance which Mr. Scott thought he observed about him) but he did not collect from him, that it was the fear of death in consequence of indisposition. He certainly appeared: to him, in perfect possession of his faculties. He took down . his examination in writing; the prosecutor assented to it, and, he believes, signed it. Mr. Scott says, that he ought to state, that they warned the prosecutor of the awful situation in which he was, and that death might ensue; but that he did not conceive him to be under the apprehension of death from what had happened.

This is the examination of the prisoner Schofield, which was taken before Mr. Scott on the 31st August, when he was committed, of course after he had been brought back from London:-" For my part I was in bed at the very time when John Hinchliffe charges me with being at his house. I lodged with my father, I am a married man. I never had any oath, nor do not know the meaning of it. I have not any thing else to say at present. I am well acquainted with John Hinchliffe of Wickens, in Upper Thong;" having, as you will recollect, when the officer apprehended him on board ship, denied all knowledge of John Hinchliffe . "I have been with him many hundred times, singing; he taught me to sing; the last time I saw him was on Tuesday morning; a part of what Hinchliffe says, is true; the reason I went to him was,

I heard at Holmfirth, that he had been saying something to Blythe about me." He certainly, according to the prosecutor's account, had been under apprehensions on that account, and had been with him two days before, saying, that he had heard, he had told Blythe what had passed about ten weeks before, when the paper was produced, and the conversation took place relating to the oath and the insurrections.

They then call Alexander Hollingworth, who is a prisoner for debt in this Castle, and who states, that in the month of July last, he was a neighbour of Schofield's father (the prisoner, you recollect, lodged with his father;) that he (the witness) heard ofHinchliffe being shot, on the same morning on which it had happened; that he set out for his work about six o'clock; he lived nearHinchliffe, and as he was going to work, he saw the prisoner and his father mowing together; he called to them out of the road, and said, " Here is a sad misfortune has happened in our town." The prisoner and his father lived in

Lower
 
Lower Thong. The old gentleman asked what it was. The Mr. Baron witness said, " Somebody has shot at John Hinchliffe." The prisoner stood close behind his father; no answer, he says, was made to him; no doubt they might not hear what was said, but he does not doubt but they both heard. The son said nothing, one way or the other. He has known the young man eighteen or nineteen years, and has never known any thing but what is good of him. This is the case, Gentlemen, laid before you on the part of the prosecution.

The prisoner, in his defence, does not deny the circumstance of his having absconded at the time that has been mentioned, that is, the 23d of July, the day after the transaction; but he accounts for it in this way; that, hearing that Hinchliffe was shot, and Hinchliffe and he having had some former conversation, of which Hinchliffe had spoken, and Blythe having said he would send him to York, he was afraid Blythe would put his threat into execution, and that was the sole reason of his leaving home, not having had any share in the fact of shooting Hinchliffe. That is the footing he puts it upon; that it was in consequence of the conversation he had had with Hinchliffe, and which he understood Hinchliffe had revealed. It does happen, certainly, that the absconding takes place on the very day after the fact of the shooting.

Then, on the part of the prisoner, they put in, by leave of the court, the prosecutor's examinations, both of them taken on the same day; the first of them before Mr. Scott, and the latter of them before Mr. Scott and Mr. Armytage. In substance I think they agree; there is no material difference between them. The observation that arises from them is with respect to the description, which, upon the 23d of July, the prosecutor gave of the persons who had done him this injury; and that he then said he could not distinguish the face of the man who fired the shot, and that he did not know him; that he appeared to be a decent-looking young man, dressed in a dark-coloured coat, and light-coloured breeches; that he whose face was covered (having described one as having his face covered) was dressed in alight mixed coat, something like a shooting jacket, and appeared to be about five feet ten inches high; that the man who fired, had on a dark-coloured coat, and a pair of light-coloured breeches, and spoke, as he thinks, in a feigned voice. Certainly he did not, upon his first examination, say that he knew either of them; on the contrary, he mentioned the face of one of them being covered, but did not say there was any part of the face uncovered, so as to give him an opportunity of seeing any part of the face. In the examination taken the same day * before two Magistrates, he says expressly, that he does not know either of them. He certainly did not give any account to the Magistrates, nor as it appears to anybody else, that he knew  knew either of these persons, till the final examination of the prisoner on the 31st of August. Then, for the first time, he gave any account of his knowledge of the prisoner. He has now positively spoken to him from his voice, which, he says, he had had an opportunity of hearing in singing, and in conversation. He had conversed with him ten weeks before, on the subject of the intended insurrections; and he had conversed with him, you observe, two days before this injury, on the subject of the witness's having made a discovery of what had passed before them on the former occasion. The fact is (and you are to judge of it) that he did not at that time state the name of the prisoner, or any suspicion of the persons who had committed this offence; on the contrary, it appears, that he told all enquirers, that he did not know them. Prudence might suggest why he should say so to general enquirers, but. the same reason does not operate as it respects the Magistrates.

The evidence which follows, is given with a view to satisfy you, that it is impossible the prisoner could, at the time of night which has been mentioned, have been in company with the man who fired the pistol. John Jagger says, he lives at

Nether Thong, and has known the prisoner ever since he was born. He lives about 40 yards from the house of the prisoner's father; and the prosecutor lives nearly two miles from the witness. He remembers hearing of Hinchliffe being shot; he cannot recollect the day of the month; but the night before be (the witness) was at a methodist meeting, at the prisoner's father's house, at which it seems he officiated in some way or other. It broke up, he thinks, about twenty minutes before ten; he says, he looked at the clock when the meeting concluded, but did not leave the house at the conclusion of the meeting; it was, he believes, about half past ten when he went away. The prisoner was not in the room in which the meeting was held; but he sa whim after the meeting broke up.

He was in the house-part at the time when the meeting broke up. The meeting was in a little parlour. When the witness left the parlour, he went into the house, and saw the prisoner sitting there; his wife was with him; they both sat by the fire; the witness sat down also. The prisoner and his wife left the house-part before he went away; and their leaving, according to his account, was by going up stairs. The prisoner said to his wife, " Betty, let us go to bed, and these people will have our room. " The stairs opened into the house-part. They went up, he believes, before ten, he himself going away about half past ten; and he saw no more of them at all that night; and that was the night that Hinchliffe received his wound,

He never knew any thing bad of him, all his life. Then, he says, he is sure it is above a mile from the prisoner's father's, to Hinchliffe's. We must take it, I think, to be about a mile,  or a little above a mile; no very great distance. This man-Thomson's Mr. Baron speaks to the prisoner's going up stairs a little before ten, apparently with an intention, at least professed, of going to bed; up. and his wife then going with him. It is impossible for him to state what became of the prisoner afterwards.

Charles Barker says, that he lives in the neighbourhood of the prisoner; that upon the evening of the 22d ofJuly, on the night of which this misfortune happened, he saw the prisoner at his own home, which was his father's; that he saw him at half-past nine o'clock, as nearly as he can tell, and the prisoner's wife also. The witness was at the Meeting. When he came out of the parlour from the Meeting, the prisoner sat in a chair at the hearth-stone; his wife was there too; he had his stockings down, and his waistcoat loose; and he said, "

Come, lass, we will go to bed;" and he and his wife went up stairs. Barker says he remained in the house, after that, better than half an hour; he cannot say exactly how long, but it was after ten when he went out. He went home; his house is about two hundred yards, or better, from the father's house.

Then he tells you, that he returned again to the prisoner's father's house that same evening, to borrow some list. You •will observe his account of the prisoner would not have carried him much further than the other account by Jagger, namely, his going to bed at a little before ten, the witness leaving the house at a little after ten, and not having seen him go out during that time; but it seems he returned again to the house that night, for the purpose of borrowing some list. The prisoner's father is of the same trade; the list was wanting to lay on a piece of cloth. When he got to the father's house again, he says, it was within'about five minutes of eleven; he then saw the prisoner in bed, as he swears; and the reason of his seeing him in bed was, as he swears, that having gone to borrow this list, while the prisoner's mother was weighing the list, he went for some water, in consequence of the prisoner's child being poorly; that the prisoner called to his mother, to fetch him water, and the witness went for it instead of the mother, while the mother weighed the listing, and that he went with the water to the prisoner, who was in bed; and when he got down again, and got his listing, he returned to his own house.

That he has known the prisoner ever since he has known any thing; that he never heard any thing of his character, but what was right; that he is sure he saw both the wife and the husband in bed at that time; that the mother was in the chamber alone, on the same floor with the bed-room; that he did not look at the clock there when he came in, but it wanted five minutes of eleven when he got home to his own house, and he looked then at his own clock. He is asked, how it happened that he had occasion to go out this particular night, : of  of all others, at that hour, for list? he says he does not often go out for listing at that time of night; and that he never did so before at that time of night. Then he says that Jagger had finished his discourse, the witness being one of the congregation, about half past nine; that the witness looked then at the clock; that the prisoner and his wife were not in the parlour; that after this meeting was over, Jagger and he had pipes, and they went away a little after ten. a question was put by the Counsel for the prosecution, to know how it happened that he went back again for this listing to finish this work of his, and how he came not to borrow it before be went away from the prisoner's father's ? His answer is, that he did not know that he should want it till he came home; that a woman, whom he calls Betty Buckley, should have done the listing, but had not done it. He then adds, that when he went, he found old Schofield was gone to bed, but the wife was up; when the witness went away first, he left old Schofield up; that his family consisted of a grandchild, that lives with him; an apprentice boy, whose age is about eighteen; the prisoner, and his wife and child, and his own wife. He says, that the list is spun ready for laying on, in the chamber where old Mrs. Schofield was; that it was half a pound of listing he wanted, for which he went back again at that hour of the night; that for any thing he knows, old Schofield was in bed, but he did not see him; that the witness had got home to his own house, and gone to bed just after eleven; that he cannot tell whether the grandchild was up or in bed, when the Meeting was over; that he saw the apprentice, who went up stairs between nine and ten. He also says, that he left his brother working at home when he went to the Meeting; and when he came back, he was short of listing; and he did not know that would be the case, and went back; but his brother had worked out what he had; he had reason to expect it would have been done byBetty Buckley, but when he returned she had not done the listing. This is his evidence. He speaks of seeing the prisoner, according to his account, going up to bed before ten 'clock, and that returning a good while after he found him in bed, somewhere about eleven o'clock; that he returned to his own home a second time, and it was a little after eleven when he returned, having left him in bed. * 7

Then they have called Mary Woodhead, who is to prove his being in bed later than this; for she says she lives at Nether Thong, and is a neighbour of John Schofield, and sister of the prisoner; that upon the 22d of July she had occasion to go to John Schofield's house at night; she went a little after twelve, she went to borrow a dose of Bateman's Drops; her husband was ill, he had been taken ill the day before indeed, but she went at this time of night, because he was so ill that he grew worse and worse ever after he went to bed; that he had been Mr. Baron in bed nearly two hours, and he awakened her a little before Thomson's twelve; she got up and dressed herself, and went for the Bateman's drops; she went there, because she knew they had them generally in the house. John Schofield too is in the practice of giving medicines. She asked for the mother; she came, and the witness told her what she wanted; she did not see ..

Mr. Schofield; the mother opened the door, and she (the witness) went into the house-part with her; the mother recommended a way of giving the drops in sage tea, and in order to get this sage, she went with the mother into another room, in which room she swears she saw the prisoner and his wife in bed; and she went into that room almost directly after coming into the house.

On her cross-examination, she says that the mother gave her the drops below stairs, that the mother went up stairs for the sage, and she went to hold the candle while the mother looked for the sage. Being asked, why could not the mother have gone up to this room for the sage herself? she says she went to hold the candle while the mother looked for it.

John Brooke is called, who says he is a clothier, and lives at Upper Thong, half a quarter of a mile, or rather better, from Hinchliffe's. He remembers Hinchliffe's receiving the wound. He himself was from home till eleven that night, or after; he went home a little after eleven, and he heard the crack of a gun or pistol, as he was going home; he was then a quarter of a mile from the house. The next morning he saw John Hinchliffe stand at Thomas Hinchliffe's door; he does not recollect that he had any conversation with him, but John

Hinchliffe said, in his hearing, he did not know the persons who had done this.

Eli Hobson is then called, with regard to the prisoner's character. He describes himself to be a clothier; and says he has known the prisoner from his infancy, and has had a great deal of acquaintance with him, and that he never heard any thing against his character, till this.

Jonas Sykes has known him several years, and says he always bore a good character since he knew him.

John Schofield, the father, was then put up on the part of the prisoner; but no question was put to him by the prisoner's Counsel. The Counsel for the prosecution, however, put some questions to him; in answer to which he states, that he remembers mowing in the field the morning after this had happened to Hinchliffe, and he remembers Hollingworth (the witness on the part of the prosecution) passing by to his work, and telling him a sad misfortune had happened that morning at Upper Thong; that John Hinchliffe was shot; that he asked whether he  he was dead, and Hollingworth said he was not, but he could not tell whether he would die or not; and he says his son went away in about an hour after this had been said by Hollingworth.

He states that he has no relations inAmerica, that he knows of. It is stated in the prisoner's examination before the Magistrate, that he was going to some relations in America; that examination had called them his wife's relations.

Upon this evidence,Gentlemen, you are to decide upon this charge brought against the prisoner at the bar, which is in substance this :-that he was present aiding and abetting the 1 other man who shot at the prosecutor John Hinchliffe. And the first thing you are to decide will be, whether the evidence on the part of the prosecutor satisfies you, when compared with the evidence given on the part of the prisoner, that the prisoner was the person who came to the house of John Hinchliffe, at the time of night that has been mentioned, armed with a pistol; that he was one of the persons who took him out of the house; and whether he came with a determined design of supporting another in shooting him, or doing it himself. The first question is, Is he that man ? Now that rests upon the evidence which has been given to you by the prosecutor Hinchliffe, who swears to his knowledge of his voice. He had taught him singing, and so had had occasion to hear his voice, and had had other opportunities of hearing it, in singing at different times, and in conversation with him so lately as the Monday before. He speaks not only to his voice, but to part of his countenance; which he says now, was partly covered with a handkerchief, but that that did not cover the whole of his face; and he now undertakes to speak positively to the prisoner's being that person, who was so joined with the other in the act which has been described. You will also take into your consideration the absconding of the prisoner upon the morning after this fact had happened. He went away, by his own account, exactly that very morning after it had happened; and he was then in a hurry, as it appears, preparing to ship himself for America, saying that he was going in consequence of letters that had come from relations in America; which relations it seems he had not: certainly, in that respect, giving a false account of himself, and stating also, both to the constable who went on board the ship, and likewise in his examination before the Magistrate in London, that he did not know John Hinchliffe. It seems he made no scruple at all in acknowledging his own name, that he was John Schofield, and telling his abode to be Nether Thong, according to the description given in a hand-bill which was shewn him; but that he persisted that he did not know any thing of John Hinchliffe. It is for your consideration what weight is due to that circumstance, when it is proved that he had so great a knowledge of John Hinchliffe. You will, upon Mr. Baron the whole, determine whether you are satisfied that he was the Thomson's person present, when this violence was first offered to Hinchliffe, and who ran away a very few moments before the firing. actually was done, and in the way stated, in consequence of the alarm of the horse. He has in his defence denied that he had any thing to do with this affair; and says, that having (as Hinchliffe has in his evidence asserted) before this time made him acquainted with the bad connexions which he (the prisoner) had in what is called Luddism, and having attempted to swear him in to be one of that party, and having heard that Hinchliffe had given information to some gentlemen of this affair, he had shortly before stated that it was all over with him if he had given that information. And the colour which he now gives to his absconding, is, not that it was on account of this violence which had been offered to Hinchliffe, but from the consciousness that he was in danger of being apprehended by reason of the communication he had made to Hinchliffe on these topics, which would have afforded reason enough for fear, certainly. But the fact is, that the morning after this affair happened, he did abscond.

You will take into your consideration also, the evidence which has been given on the part of the prisoner, with respect to his being at another place than that where this fact happened, at the time when it happened. The precise time when it happened, perhaps, it is not extremely easy to ascertain. The prosecutor, according to his account, had gone to bed between ten and eleven, and was called between eleven and twelve, as he guesses it. His neighbour, Thomas Hinchliffe, to whose house he ran, says, that when it was over, and he had opened 、 the door, and was going in, he looked at his clock, and it was half past eleven. The evidence that has been laid before you, to prove what is called an alibi, would fix him with going to bed somewhat before ten o'clock, and being seen in bed by two persons after ten. The witness, Barker, tells you, that he had been at the house, and went back again, and saw him in bed at very nearly eleven o'clock; for he says (if he speaks truly, and if his clock went sight) that when he went home with the list, it was past eleven at night. There is then the sister of the prisoner, who went at twelve o'clock at night (if she speaks accurately also) to the house of her father and mother, in order to get some medical drops to relieve her husband, who was very ill; she speaks to seeing him at twelve o'clock in bed, leaving him there when she went out.

It will therefore be for you first to consider, whether the prisoner was the person who was present when this offence was committed; because, if the evidence does not satisfy your minds that he was one of the persons there, it is immaterial to consider what share that that person, who was there, took in the transaction. If it was not Thomson's the prisoner at the bar, he is not answerable for what that person did. You will, when making up your minds upon this point, consider that the prosecutor had never spoken (even to the Magistrate) to his knowledge of the person of either of the two men, or even to his suspicion that one of them was the prisoner, till the 31st of August. If you are satisfied that the prisoner was that person, and then only, it will be material for you to consider, whether the share he took in the transaction does or does not implicate him in the crime imputed to him. Now, if these two persons (whoever they were) came with a premeditated design(and you should be of that opinion from the circumstances) either to shoot, or do some great bodily harm to the prosecutor, and if this calling him up was a mere contrivance to get him into their possession, that that purpose might be executed, they will both be equally guilty. If the prosecutor speaks truly, two persons laid hold of him, only with his shirt on, that is, one of one arm, and one of the other, saying, they wanted him to shew them were a person lived, not naming that man; and that then one of them ran away upon hearing the horse coming, and the other fired. If you can suppose they had come there really with a design only to get informed where the man lived, whose name they did not mention, and that that was not a mere pretence; and that the one man ran away, not having been privy to any design of the other to shoot the prosecutor; then to be sure he would not be answerable for what the other did in his absence. If he was privy to that, if they came with this joint design, and his intention was to do this man a mischief, then, under the circumstances stated,, he will be, in my opinion, guilty; for you will remember, both of them had brought pistols, and they were both endeavouring to get the man out of the house.

The questions for your consideration will be, first, whether you are satisfied that the prisoner at the bar is that second man who was so present. If you are not satisfied of that fact, the other enquiry will fall altogether to the ground.

If you are satisfied that he is the man, I mean, comparing the evidence which has been laid before you on the part of the prisoner, with that given on the part of the prosecutor, which I repeat again, is evidence given as to his knowledge of the party for the first time on the 31st of August; if you are satisfied, notwithstanding this evidence which has been given, not deciding upon conjecture only, but with certainty, that he was the man; it will be for you to say, whether he went with the other man with the criminal purpose imputed to him, namely, the aiding and assisting the other in so shooting at Hinchliffe. In deciding upon the evidence to prove the prisoner could not be there, you will take into your consideration the probable difference of clocks. You will likewise consider the Mr. Baron character which has been given him. In doubtful circumstances, certainly a man's character is of consequence to him.

Now, Gentlemen, you will consider of your verdict, and will give that which will satisfy your consciences, and which will, I have no doubt, do justice between the country and the prisoner. If a doubt remains, it ought always to preponderate in favour of the prisoner.

The Jury retired at half past five, and returned in half an hour, finding the prisoner - - - Not Guilty.