# The Prime Minister Assassinated




1812 John Bellingham

It seems that *The Globe* managed to rush out an announcement regarding the assassination in quick time, although the majority of reports would not appear until the following morning's newspaper editions.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000398/18120513/004/0003
Hereford Journal - Wednesday 13 May 1812

LONDON, MONDAY, MAY 11.

MR PERCEVAL was SHOT DEAD at half past five this evening in the House of Commons. It is said the Assassin was a Liverpool Merchant. The place is all confusion. The doors were instantly secured, and no person suffered to leave the house. The Assassin was taken with the pistol in his hand. He confessed the deed. His name, he said, was John Jas. Bellingham. Mr. Perceval was shot through the heart, and expired instantly. The Assassination took place in the Lobby. The House of Commons adjourned immediately. They are now examining Witnesses in the Strong Room. Mr. Dowling, who took the pistol from the Assassin, is under examination. The Assassin said his case was well known—it was a denial of justice. The Lords also closed their doors, and proceeded to deliberate on the subject. Mr. Perceval only lived long enough to cry out—Murder! Murder!!" The Assassin did not attempt to escape.—*Globe Office, Six o'clock.*


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18120512/006/0003
Morning Chronicle - Tuesday 12 May 1812

ASSASSINATION OF MR. PERCEVAL. We have the painful duty of communicating to readers a most atrocious and afflicting event — the Assassination of the Right Honourable Spencer Perceval, under circumstances that find no parallel in history. Whether the horrid perpetrator were really insane, does not distinctly appear, but we are informed that he has been confined for some time in a receptacle for lunatics. The circumstances that have reached us are the following:—

Yesterday afternoon, at about a quarter past five, as Mr. Perceval was entering the Lobby of the House of Commons, he was shot by a person of the name of Bellingham, who had placed himself for that purpose at the side of the door leading fromn the stone staircase. Mr. Perceval was in company with Lord F. Osborne, and immediateiy on receiving the ball, which entered the left breast, he staggered and fell at the feet of Mr. W. Smith, who was standing near the second pillar. The only words, he uttered were, "Oh! I am murdered," and the latter was inarticalate, the sound dying between his lips. He was instantly taken up by Mr. Smith, who did not recognize him until he had looked in his face. The report of the pistol immediately drew great numbers to the spot, who assisted Mr. Smith in conveying the body of Mr. Percival into the Speaker's apartments, but before he reached them, all signs of life had departed. Mr. Perceval's corpse was placed upon a bed, and Mr. Lynn, of Great George Street, who had up been sent for, arrived, but too late even to witness the last symnptoms of expiring existence. He found that the ball, which was of an unusually large size, had penetrated the heart near its crentre, and had passed completely through it. From thence the boiy was removed to the Speaker's drawing-room, by Mr. Lynn and several members, and it was laid on a sopha.

The horror and dismay occasioned by the assassination of Mr. Perceval prevented any attention from being paid to other persons, and it was not until the Right Honourable Gentleman was raised from the floor that a person belonging to the Vote Office exclaimed, "Where is the rascal that fired?" when a person of the name of Bellingham, who had been unobserved, stepped up to him and coolly observed, "I am the unfortunate man." He did not make any attempt to escape, though he had thrown away the pistol by which he had perpetrated the horrid deed, but resigned himself quietly into the hands of some of the bye-standers. They placed him upon a bench near the fire-place, where they kept him, and all the doors were closed, and the egress of any persons prevented. When the assassin was interrogated as to his motive for this dreadful act, he replied, "My name is Bellingham; it is a private injury — I know what I have done — it was a denial of justice on the part of Government."— At this time the Prisoner was in no legal custody, but was surrounded by many Members, who insisted that he should be taken into the body of the House. The criminal was however previously searched, to which he made no resistance, and upon his person were found a steel pistol, loaded, about seven inches in length (the fellow ti that with which he had effected his fatal purpose, which had been secured) with a short screw barrel, and a bundle of papers folded like letters. Two Messengers, Wright and Skelton, then conveyed the prisoner to the bar of the House of Commons, where the utmost confusion and anxiety prevailed. The Speaker had quitted the Chair, the House having resolved itself into the Committee on the Orders in Council, but on hearing the afflicting intelligence, he returned and resumed his seat. Order having been restored, General Gascoyne said in an audible voice, "I think I know the villain," and walking up to the assassin, and looking in his face inquired, "Is not your name Bellingham?" -He returned no answer, but by shaking his head, and stood afterwards motionless, and aparently composed, resting his hands upon the Bar, and looking directly forwards to the Chair.

The Speaker then proposed in a firm voice, that the criminal should be conveyed to the prison-room, and that a Magistrate should be sent for to receive the examination of the witnesses of the shocking transaction.-*(Hear, hear!)*— He also stated, that in order that the prisoner might be less able to attempt an escape, or a rescue be effected by accomplices, it would be fit that he should be conducted to the place of confinement, not through the lobby where the murder had been perpetrated, but through the private avenues around the House.

This proposal was highly approved, and the Speaker further said, that it might render the detention of the criminal more secure if Members would precede, in order to see that all the passages were clear.

A great many Gentlemen immediately rose to comply with the request, when

Mr Whitbread, in a tone of voice which betrayed the difficulty he felt in commanding his feelings, observed, that to prevent confusion it would be better if those Members who should go before for the purpose of seeing that the passages were clear were named from the Chair, or the eagerness of all to fulfil the undertaking would prevent its proper execution.—*(Hear!)*

The Speaker added, that it would be right that the utmost precaution should be used, not only lest the criminal should injure others, but should attempt violence on himself *(hear! hear!)*.— He then named Mr. Whitbread, Mr. Long, and Mr. Bootle, who directly left the House to clear the avenues to the prison-room. The assistance of several other messengers was called in, who followed with Bellingham in their custody, and they were succeeded by Lord Ossulston, Mr. Villiers, Mr. Manning, Mr. Wharton, Mr. Pole, and about ten others.

The Speaker also directed that all Members who were Magistrates of Middlesex, as well as all persons who had witnessed any part of the transaction, should attend the Committee to examine and to give evidence.

Sir C. Burrell produced the loaded pistol taken from the prisoner, and another Member the bundle of papers found in his coat pocket.

The House was then adjourned.

Bellingham was conducted without the slightest resistance to a large room beyond the termination of the upper lobby, where the Magistrate (Mr. Watson Serjeant at Arms of the House of Lords) who had been sent for, attended; Mr. Alderman Combe, Mr. Angelo Taylor, and other Magistrates assisted at the examination. The witnesses proved the facts we have above commnunicated. It appeared that a person was standing between the Deceased and the Prisoner, at the time the pistol was fired, and that the latter, to effect his diabolical design, was obliged to raise his hand over the shoulder of the intervening individual, and the ball consequently took a slanting direction, entering rather high upon the breast bone. The flash of the pistol was seen by many, but the perpetration of the crime was so instantaneous, that its prevention was impossible. The Assassin has been often seen lately in the Gallery of the House of Commons, and it appears that he had yesterday been watching the entrance of every Member into the Lobby with great attention, although this circumstance could excite no peculiar notice. Gerneral Gascoyne, the Member for Liverpool, deposed before Mr. Watson and the other Magistrates, that he had seen Bellingham often, and that he had received many Petitions and Memorials from him respecting some claims upon Government, which he ought to be allowed. These demands, it is stated, originated in services alleged to be perfomad by the Criminal in Russia, for which he complains that he has obtained no remuneration. It seems likewise, that numerous similar ineffectual representations were made to the unfortunate victim of his revenge, and to the Speaker. General Tarleton also gave evidence, as well as many others who witnessed the perpetration of the sanguinary deed, and those who first seized upon the prisoner's person.

The facts stated, seem to discountenance altogether the idea that any accomplices were concerned with Bellingham in this inhuman deed; although in an Evening Paper it was thrown out, that because persons were seen running out of Westminster Hall, immediately after the murder, they might be accomplices in the deed. It was natural that men might be eager to communicate the extraordinary event to their friends.

The dreadful intelligence spread with amazing rapidity, and before six o'clock, the crowd collected on the outside was so great that it was deemed prudent to close the doors of Westminster Hall, as well as to plant constables at all the entrances, to prevent a concourse within the passages of the House. Ingress was denied to all persons but Members and witnesses. The multitude kept augmenting every minute, and at length it was resolved, that in order to ensure tranquillity, and to produce a dispersion of the mob, that the Horse Guards should be called out. They accordingly left their quarters, and paraded in Old and New Palace-yard, and in St. Margaret and Parliament street until a late hour. The gates of St. James's Park were closed about eight o'clock, where the Foot Guards were drawn out, and the City Militia, as well as several bodies of volunteers, were called to preserve the peace of the metropolis; and they all mustered with an alacrity that did them the highest honour.
 
During the whole of the examination, the assassin maintained the utmost composure. He said he had for more than a fortnight watched for a favourable opportunity of effecting his purpose; that he had implored for justice in vain; that he had made application to every person likely to procure him redress; and that he had been at length driven to despair, by being told at the public offices that he might do his worst.—"I have obeyed them. I have done my worst, and I rejoice in my deed." Not the slightest symptom of remorse appeared in the wretch, notwithstanding the universal horror which his atrocity had produced on all that surrounded him.

Mrs. Perceval was on a visit to the Honourable Mrs. Ryder, Lady of the Right-Honourable the Secretary of State for the Home Department, at his house in Great George-street, Westminster, when the sad catastrophe happened, and was apprised of it on her return at five o'clock, to Downing-street. Mrs. Perceval and his children, 12 in number, are plunged into inexpressible grief, as is Lord Arden, his brother. Every window of the house was immediately closed, but the street was thronged with the populace till midnight.
 
The environs of Parliament-street and Palace-yard were rendered almost impassable by the pressure of the crowd, notwithstanding the vigilance of the police-officers.
 
A Cabinet Council was summoned, and the departure of the Post was delayed, till dispatches could be made rout, and instructions prepared for the Civil and Military Authorities in every part of the United Kingdom, in order that seasonablc steps may be taken for preserving the peace throughout the country— and particularly in these distrcits where an inflamed and infatuated multitude have committed the most savage barbarities. We have every reason to believe that the measures taken will be effectual; as the military power in the disturbed counties is entrusted to a most vigorous and yet humane Officer, the Honourable General Maitland, in whose sagacity, firmness, and exertions, the public may have the most entire cinfidence.— The Earl of Derby aud Earl of Stamford have also left town for their respective counties, to exert their authority as Lords Lieutenants, to restore tranquillity.

The Committee concluded their examination of the assassin at half after nine o'clock; and a notice was sent to Mr. NeIwman, the Keeper of Newgate, to prepare for the reception of the delinquent. Mr. Sheriff Heygate went himself to Newgate, and gave particular directions, that the murderer, when received into the gaol, should be watched in such a way as to prevent the possibility of his perpetratinig suicide.

The Cabinet Council sat to a late hour, and between twelve and one o'clock this morning he was conveyed under a strong escort of Dragoon Guards, in a coach, to Newgate.

The commitment was signed by Micael Angelo Taylor, Esq. who accompaned him in the coach to Newgate, attended by Mr. Ross, one of his Majesty's Messengers, and two Officers of the Police. The troop of horse was under the command of Colonel Barton: the cavalcade did not arrive at Newgate till one o'clock, and by order of the Cabinet Council two men were ordered to sit up in the cell with him.

The nature of the man's claims, we understand to no other than that he imputes to our Ministers in Russia the want of protection, or of interference in a dispute which he had with the Consul of Archangel, by which he incurred a loss of seven or 8,000l. but in which the British Government had nothing to do. He was imprisoned in Russia in consequence of his violence; and on his arrival here, he applied to all the public offices, even those which had nothing to do with any such business; and was told by all of them, that they could not take cognizance of his private affairs. He says that he was driven to despair; he three weeks ago, bought the pistols for the horrid deed, which he has at last perpetrated.

BELLINGHAM is a tall, large-boned man, about 40 years of age, with a thin, long visage and aquiline nose; his eyes are sunken, and his complexion, at the time we saw him just after the assassination, of a ghastly, pallid hue. After committing the horrid deed he quietly sat himself down on the bench near the fire in the lobby; but before he was taken into the House, he appeared greatly, agitated and clasped his hands, although he was far from supplicating pity. His principal anxiety seemed to be, to persuade the wondering spectators that the act was justifiable from the provocation he had received.
 
Thus has the existence of the Right Honourable Spencer Perceval been terminated — a man of whom much good may and ought to be said, and whose errors shall be, with his remains, consigned to the grave. He was the affectionate father of twelve children, and the support of numbers who needed his charitable aid. However mistaken may have been his political views, and however disastrous for his country the result, none have denied him the praise of integrity of intention.

A new writ will be moved this day for the election of a Member for Northampton in the room of Mr. Perceval; after which, it is suppged a short adjournment (at least of public business) will take place, to give the Prince Regent time to arrange a new Administration.

The inquest on the body will be taken before Lord Ellenborough, the Grand Coroner of England.



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002775/18120512/007/0003
Pilot (London) - Tuesday 12 May 1812

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002193/18120514/012/0004
Saint James's Chronicle - Thursday 14 May 1812

...

Farther Particulars of John Bellingham the Assassin.

TO DO


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002194/18120515/002/0002
Sun (London) - Friday 15 May 1812

Also in [Northampton Mercury - Saturday 16 May 1812](https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000317/18120516/004/0003)

Our Readers, we are sure, will peruse the following Letter with indignation and horror:

"Nottingham, Tuesday, Twelve o'clock at Night.

No sooner had the news of Mr. PERCEVAL'S murder been received in this town, than the most enthlsiastic demonstrations of joy of the most horrible description were evinced. The bells were rung, bonfires were lighted up, and a tumultuous crowd of people assembled in front of the guardroom, with drums beating, flags flying, &c. Here they stood shouting and huzzaing, and expressing their savage joy by their gestures. In this perturbed and threatening state of the town, the military drums beat to arms, and the troops being assembled, the Riot Act was read, and the most energetic measures were adopted by the General to preserve the public peace. These measures, I am happy to say, have been effectual: it is now half past twelve o'clock, and all is quiet."

The *Northampton Mercury* continues: *We are sorry to add that Nottingham is not the only place in which this spirit has been evinced.*

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0001651/18120512/009/0002?browse=true
Globe - Tuesday 12 May 1812

ASSASSINATION OF MR PERCEVAL

TO DO

and continues https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0001651/18120512/011/0003?browse=true


...



...

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001173/18120521/022/0003
Perthshire Courier - Thursday 21 May 1812

LONDON, May 11

ASSASSINATION OF MR PERCEVAL

TO DO


http://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002194/18120515/002/0002
Sun (London) - Friday 15 May 1812

The Trial of Bellingham

Old Bailey, Friday May 15.

TO DO

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002647/18120513/020/0003
Statesman (London) - Wednesday 13 May 1812

AUTHENTIC PARTICULARS RESPECTIN G THE BEHAVIOUR OF JOHN BELLINGHAM SINCE HIS COMMITMENT TO NEWGATE

lHe arrived at Newgate about one o'clock yesterday morning, and was conducted into a room adjoining the chapel, with a boarded floor, lately occupied by the celebrated Roberts, and some years ago by the *Maniac* HATFIELD who attempted the life of the KING. One of the head turnkeys, and two other persons, sat up with him all night, and he retired to bed soon after his arrival at Newgate; but was very disturbed, and had no sound sleep during the night. He rose soon after seven o'clock, and requested some tea for breakfast as soon as convenient, which was accordingly sent to him with some bread and butter, of which he eat but little. He was visited yesterday by the Sheriffs and a few other public characters, but no private persons were suffered to see him. He conversed very cheerfully with the Sheriffs, and others who were in his room, and expressed no regret for the deed which he had perpetrated, conceiving himself, as he stated, justified in what he had done; and that it now only remained for the laws of his country to determine the nature of his guilt, which he does not seem to view in a criminal light. He states that the question will now be tried, when it will be seen how far he is justified. He considers the whole as a private matter between him and the Government, who gave him a *carte blanche* to do his worst, which he had done."

Alderman COMBE, as one of the Committing Magistrates, has been very active in his endeavours to trace out BELLINGHAM's connections and habits, and for that purpose went to the house of a respectable woman where he lodged, near Guilford-street, but could learn from her nothing that indicated any conspiracy with others. His landlady represented him as a quiet, inoffensive man, though at times rather eccentric, which she instanced by observing, that when he had lodged there only three weeks, at 10s. per week, she was surprised to find that he had given her servant-maid half-a-guinea for herself. On being told the deed which he had perpetrated at five o'clock, she said that was impossible; for that she had met him a few minutes before that time, when he told her, that he had just been to buy a prayer-book. She represented him as of a religious turn of mind.

Yesterday he requested to have pen, ink, and paper, to write some letters to his friends, and he accordingly wrote one to his family at Liverpool, which was delivered open to Mr. NEWMAN, but we do not know its contents. The following was sent to Mrs. ROBERTS, No. 9, New Milman-street, the lady at whose house he lodged. It will serve to show the state of his mind, in the miserable situation to which he has reduced himself:

TO DO


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000221/18120521/006/0004
Bath Chronicle and Weekly Gazette - Thursday 21 May 1812

TRIAL JOHN BELLINGHAM. FOR THE MURDER OF Mr. PERCEVAL.

...

The prisoner having obtained the papers taken from him on Moday, addressed the Court, for nearly two hours, in a collected and fluent manner:

Gentlemen of the Jury, (said he,) I feel that I am under great obligations to the learned Attorney General for inducing the Court to dismess the the objection that was made by my Counsel on the ground of insanity; because it is by far more fortunate for me that such a plea should be determined to be unfounded, than that it should be established.

TO DO At the same time, I must express my gratitude to my Counsel, whose object was certainly most meritorious. That I am insane I am certainly am perfectly ignorant; and I assure you that I never had an idea of it, with the exception of one instance in Russia, where my insanity was made a matter of public notoriety.—f/’Av prifoner hen appe jrr f mu.h .“nharrajfed. but after a Jhort proceeded —Gentlemen, beg pardon for thu« detaining you, but wholly nnaccuftomed (iruation* like the prefent, and thisisrh** lir(l tune everaddr* fled public audience; therefore hope receive your candid indulgence, and trufl that you will pay more attention the matter detailed than the manner which it is delivered. *We arc row .fc- of the fadls of thi* molt ftngulat afl'tir, and the circumllances under which I am brought {ij may the phrafe) v'y/tfs/ccr this bar, Dc y«-a me the man with deliberate design without caufeor provocation, with put end the life Mr. Perceval No! Gentlemen, farothcrwSfe have ftrnng reasons for my csndudl, however extraordinary; m* which, when have concluded, you will acknowledge have fully justitied fin this fatal Had not pofTefTed these imperious incitements, and had murdered him cold blood, J mon- Her, n<>t only .unfit to live thi* world, but too wicked for torment* that may influfted the next.’’—The ftir.mff then proceeded to relate transactions, commencing 1904, which period be went to Russia, for the condudUng mercantile concerns. He dated bis arrcll Archangel; his journey to Petersburg; his applications to Sir Stephen Shairpe, ana Lord Levison Gower, obtain hi* from confinement, under a charge, which the prisoner alleged f.Ufe, of giving information Lloyd’s Coffee-House regarding the loss of ship. afterwards went on, at great length, detail great number of circumstances of predion and ignominy, with which he was treated in Russia, without being able obtain the slightest redress, notwithstanding his repeated applications to the Britiih Consoul General and The Russian authorities at length being worn out with persecuting him, permitted him to depart; extorting from him, however, very large sum of money. Throughout the whole he infilled llrcnuouflr, a point great importance, that case was a national concern, and that the nation ought have remunerated him for his losses, a* well for his personal sufferrings. He appealed to the jury fathers, men, and : what would have been their fenfations had they been imprisoned, while his wife, who was then pregnant, and his child, were compelled to proceed England from Russia, without friend or protector! read the Court a vast variety of petitions, memorials, and other documents to the Prince Regent, the Treasury, the MFuftcrs, the Privy Council,and the Parliament, stating his case, well as the rcfufals from all quarters grant him assistance. His misfortunes attributed to G. Gower, and that was unfortunate thing that hi* had not entered the lobby before Mr. Perceval; for his Lordship’s death Should have been better satisfied —{ I his sentiment produced very strong felicitation, more particularly Lord G. JL. Gower was sitting but short distance from the prisoner, who looked him firmly the face.]—Bellingham then went on to notice his fruitless application* Mr v Perceval, whom he wished to recommend his case to Parliament, but who refused. whom then to referred fit was a national case, and the council of the nation appealed. He afterwards was bandied about from one public office to another, reduced to the utmost distress, and without the means obtaining living for wife and family, crying t.>r food. Justice was no where t« obtained; what then mud have been bi* feelings, and what could have been his alternative Before he resolved upon the fatal adl, last exp« thought right to give InformaMon Bow-street agalnft his Majesty’s Government, flating that the justice had been obstructed. His notice contained words, ** tjiis reasonable request refilled, shall obliged jufUct for myfclf, and (hull prepared to argue that lullificatinn whenever wherever it necessary,” Being told by Mr H»*a4 that could not lruerferc,he again applied to Mr, Ryder and Mr. Hill, Treasury, gave him thi* carti hl^*ihe y that liberty to take fuck meafures ai thought right.’' In coufequenccof this kind defiance had refolved perpetrate the death of one of the individuals whom had been lo grievoufly injured.— ** Gentlemen, now coming to conclusion. have Hated you abiitorv of caie,in the firm hope that will prove lome jullideation of the crime with which I charged. (hall only further trouble you with defence which, at late hour last night, and at hour this morning, I drew up, [Here the prisoner read from written paper, in lubllance the following rffedl: Gentlemen, r appear before the tribunal of Gon, I appear there a* innocent the wilful murder Mr. Perceval, they, who, after judgment, are admitted aiiiong the Angel* Heaven. That arm him. fallow; that by my hand, admit; but constitute felony, there mull ntaliseprepemfe there mull be the wilful (ctentlos, and I deny that that has been proved unless proved, however, tli* felony cannot be made our; this you will shortly hear from the Bench, and in that case you must acquit me.


TO DO
 Recollect, Gentlemen, what was my situation; recollect that family was ruined, and myself destroyed, merely because it was Mr. Perceval’s pleasure that justice should not be granted; sheltering himfself behind the imagined security of his station, and trampling upon law and right, the belief that no retribution could reach him. Of that departed Gentleman I do not wish to speak. 
 TO DO with Ido not wilh fay any thing the virtues which he wa* allowed pnffef* ; and when 1 of him, 1 fpeak of him only in reference mgicU. lo cafe Urong a* mine, wheo 1 . (f>i4y right, ami not 1 favour ; I demanded vrh.it in the hirth-right and privilege of every F.nglifhimo. when iMiniller lets hlrnfelf above the laws, *n Mr. Perceval did, he docs his own petlonal rihe. If this were not fo, the mere will ol the Minifler would become the law, and what would then become your liberties ? A* any malicious intention towards Mr. Perceval, any deftre Injure him, fu- avow that it was molt from heart Juftice, and jullice only, was my object. was driven tt defpalr, agony, ruin, by in- of Miihflers gave notice at Haw-llreet, that my claims were rejedlcd, ! would myfclf jullicet and that Colely certain in criminal Court Justice, whether Minister of England ha* right refused?? justice subject of realm. I have ! and again repeat, that the refufsl of justice, on the nan Administration, was the fhk* caufe this sad catastrophe; and his Majesty's Minsters • row reflect upon own imnure conduct for which has deprived the country of the talents of Mr. Perceval. It is melancholy fact, Hat warp justice any pretext, or under any drcumflances.is of all moral evil: this pnlUioa needs any proof, iht unfortunate event upon which you are now assembled to decide aflV»rds that proof. The cruelty of case mud obvious to you. If unfortunate man stops another upon the highway, and robs him few shillings, he deprived of life hut -have been robbed of thousands by the Government } deprived of every thing ; I have been for years ; wife, family, have been ruined ; and am now called to answer for life, because Mr. Perceval chose patronize iniquity. What ther mull be the crime the Government towards } Ami yet goes unpunished. I* there any comparison the two cases ? mile to a mountain. bad no tentative but sink into utter ruin, or fake the melancholy lien which have adopted. I was prompted it maliceprepenfe ; I was incited the hope of bringing into Court unfortunate case, without winch I knew it never could promulgated ; and I was incited the desire of afterwards resuming to the bosom of my family with comfort and honour. trull that this serious lesson will operate warning all future. Ministers, and that they will henceforth the thing that is right; for if the upper ranks of society are permitted act wrong with impunity, the inferior ramifications will soon become wholly corrupted. Gentlemen, my life is in your hands, I rely confidently upon youi^juflicc; know not what your verdict may but sooner than suffer what have dons foV the last eight years, five hundred deaths would lie preferably. If tqdacrilice my life. (hall meet doom with conlcious tranquillity ; I shall look forward to it the weary traveller looks for the promised inn, where may repose his wearied frame after enduring the pelting the pitiless storm.^—Gentlemen, it will now remain between Goo and your conferences to what your verdict will be.” The prisoner, when had concluded, sat down much agitation, and burst into tears asked for glass of water, which was brought; and he continued for time predt perturbation of mind.—The prisoner’s witnesses were then called in, and examined by his Counsel. Mrt. Ann Uillctt deposed that the father of the prisoner died mad • ami that ever his return from Russia, Hdllngham had been considered insane upon this .übie<sl by ill hi-* friends. occafioa to«»k the witness and his wife the Secretary State’s office, to convince them that he should soon receive tO.OOoI, from Government. When he arrived, he was told positively, that would get nothing, and yet when he got into the street, -aled to his wife the truth his aflemon, and declared that he would buy cllate the well of England, ami haufe London. She added, that she came from Southampton. unsolicited, to tell what she knew of the prisoner. reaaing the papers the account Mr. Perceval’s assassination.— Mrt, Clark had known Bellingham for seven years, and had always considered him deranged, particularly since his return to England. —Mrtrtf servant to Mrs. Robert *, with whom ?? lodged London, the day of the assassination, swore that Ibe confidered him not quite right in his understanding. -.4iut the cross examination these witnesses, neither of them knew of his having attended by medical or retrained for orfd hour by his friends, account of mental denplpemeat; and Ann fidgint admitted that ilAiJaydhe attended divine service, both morning and evening, the Chapel of tlve Foundling Hospital, with her mi 11 refs and her litth? fon; that he accompanied them Monday to the European Museum; and was in the a regular and orderly person. Sir James Mansfield addressed the Jury. Having recapitulated the whole evidence, he proceeded to state the defence of the prisoner. that defence, Sir James continued, has brought forward what suffered in Russia a Nullification or what has done that he only sought for juflice. and that hirafelf had right avenge r.is caufe in the way he did. A dreadful mode of for if a man fancied that when could not proceed what be might coufider jull cauf.-, had right put the preCtfmed author ol his failure death, the lame kind argument, every perfon preliding Court of Judicature might wirjflmatvd, when refilled to grant the claims of any Individual who fund there for jullice. With regard the act Itfelf, had hem attempted do away its criminality by the plea the prifoner** infinity; but that plea was acknowledged the law only under peculiar circumllanees. If man was infane as not to able dUtlnguifh ri«ht from wrong, dlfcriminatc between the molt wicked or the moll virtuous deed, fnch man would not criminally refponliblc ft»r his conduct. But it malfi clearly made out that was completely void of fcafon incapable right from wron£: that did not know, for example, that murder was either in the fight of God orman. other infanity can a general plea. There were, however, various kinds madnefs. Lunacy, for example, in which a perfou was commonly afflicled with mental derangement only par! ticular periods; and committed any crime at the time when fucli derangement was them, they ll»od hut if they wire guilty any crime when their diforder was upon them, and when they were capable judging between right and wrong, then, though it might be proved they were occationally that svould no jullificatifin of crime committed a time when theii was manifctl. There was another of iufanity which difplayed itfelf only upon the occurrence of fomc particular occaliun, the fo affiidled being perfectly fane on other occafions. liut with regard to the infanity attempted be urged in behalf the prifoner,the witnefles had nor defenbud what confittvd; thejr had only, he thought, given a very lingular account, which proved nothing, if it was meant prove that he was inum* at the time he committed the crime for which fiood indicted. Here the learned Judge recapitulated the evidence of the witntfTes.] all the evidence laid before them, there was not one fadl adduced, which proved difordered mind. They therefore hud conlider. 111, Whether Mr. Perceval was really murdered in the manner Rated the indidlmenc: ‘2dly, Whether was killed the prifoner at the bar: and idly, Should they affirm the firfl two, whether polTelled a fufficiefit degree of underftanding at the time, to koovv dillindllv that fliooting a nun was a crime? If they hud any doubts upon points, they would acquit the prifonerj but if they had none, they mu find him guilty. The Jury witlijlrew lor about ten minutes, when they returned the box, and gave in a verdict of—GW/y, The Recorder then the prifoncr the following words —“John Bellingham, you have been con vi died, melt merciful]ury,oi one of the moll malicious crimes that human nature can perpetrate; crime which has in all and all nations, been In the highell Odious and dcteflable, however, it in every cafe, it is in yours aggravated and heightened many atrocious ciivumltauces. The object of your bloodthirrty was poflcllcJ every public and every , private virtual In defi him, you robbed charity of one of its religion-, one of it* firmed fupnortrrs; domcillc luc,ot one of mod endearing charadtees; .>nd his country,of our of its brighteft ornaimnrs. Every part your iniquitous condudl, KrouglylmprelTed with every quality atrocity. the very fandluary the Senate which adorned, and he was the point of fulfilling his duty there his country, ymi faertficed him your Infuriate and malignant revenge. indulge your motives, would only lead me into the revolting details of wickcdnefs that unparalleled. The more the dreadful tranfaCiion is contemplated, the more the mind recoils from the horrid feene. Aflaffination is the molt abhorred of crimes. It renders bravery ufelefs, and cowardice triumphant. But the voice of God has declared, that (hftddetii man's blood,by man Ihalllnsblood (bed; and publicly therefore you mofl expiate your crime. May your ignominious tale deter others from limilar atrocity. very fiiort time remains for you to fupplicatethe Throne Mercy. it diligently, implore you. I fmcercly hope that the Interval which has fince the commiflion of your dreadful crime, lias been in folemn endeavours propitiate your offended and moll fervent wifl» is, that your prayers may find acceptance, through the merits your Redeemer. It now only remains for me the fen* fence ol the law, is, That you be taken, on Monday next, place c* execution, there to hung the neck rill you arc dead,and your body deliv

...


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002775/18120518/009/0003
Pilot (London) - Monday 18 May 1812

EXECUTION OF BELLINGHAM.

This being the day uppomted for carrying into effect the awful sentence of the law, on this atrocous criminal, the populace began to collect in considerable numbers in the front of Newgate this morning by half-past four o'clock, and before eight o'clock the area opposite the Debtors' door, at which the gallows was placed, the adjoining streets, windows, and even the roof of St. Sepulchre's church, were crowded with spectators. From the confined space,and the multitude assembled, serious apprehensions were entertained, that, as on a former occasion, many lives would be lost; but, happily, such precautions had been taken by the Sheriffs as to secure the safety of the populace, and to provide against accidents. Barriiers, like turnpike-gates, were placed at proper intervals and at places most liable to the occurrence of accidents, to resist the pressure, and contract the undalating motions of the crowd. No Carts or carriages were suffered to puss, or to remain stationary, for the accommodation of those who chose to pay for getting upon them, as heretofore: and a hand-bill, of which the subjoined is a copy, was posted in different places, and carried about on boards fastened to the end of poles, by constables, stationed in the area beteen a strong railing and the gallows:—

"Beware of entering the crowd! Remember thirty persons were crushed to death by the crowd when Haggerty and Holloway were executed."

BELLINGHAM, since his condemnation, has been fed upon bread and water; all means of suicide have been removed, and he had nor been shaved. The Ordinary of Newgate, and two other Clergy-men, visited him several times in the course of Saturday and yesterday. He appeared naturally depressed by his situation, but persisted in defending what he had done. There was no *condemned sermon* yesterday. The Ordinary atended at his cell between eight and nine, Bellingham seemed considerably dejected: but on being spoken to on religious subjects, expressed himself in the same vague and insensible manner as before — talked of the promises of the gospel — inquired the hour and place of execution — said, that life had been a weary pilgrimage to him — the bliss fleeting and illusory, the misery real and permanent; and in laying it down, he had no vain regrets to make. He conversed in this strain for a considerable time, and closed by hopes of a blessed immortality, and a resolute denial of any guilt in his crime.

The dejection which was apparent in the morning, continued to deepen in the course of the day, and at ten o’clock he became penitent for his other offences, but begged the Ordinary not to mention the crime for which his life had become forfeited, as he had made up his mind as to that, and his determination to die under a conviction that what he had dene was in vindication of his own grievances, which the country had refused to redress, He passed the night, composedly, —awoke this Morning about five o’clock, — at six dressed, and washed himeelf, and was as usual tatiturn and reserved. At half-past six he began to read several passages in the Liturgy, and some of the penitentiary Psalms.

TO DO At intervals he up ejuculationsand extemporaneous with great fervency, ‘vase, und coherence ; so much so that Dr. Foro, the Ordinary, in the course of his at- tendance was astonished, that a man who ap- peared to have the principles of religion so deeply Impressed upon his mind, should be so hardened and impenitent as to appear unconscious that the deliberate murder of a fellow-creature wus Hot a crime in the sight of both God and man. seven o'clock the arrival of the Ordinary was nounced to the Prisoner, who received the Reve- rend Gentleman in a room adjoining his cell, aud shook him by the hand. On being whether prepared ta make’ ® coufession of his guilt,—he answered thar his mind was perfectly mude up; that he was prepared to meet his doom—his opinion as to that crime remained unaltered and analterable, though he did feel contrition for his other offences, and was can- vinced that he conld obtain forgiveness only through the merits of a crucified Saviour. The Ordinary conceiving this suffictent to. authorize him to administer the sacrament, which he did w the usual way on such occasions; the criminal received the. elements with becoming: devotion, nyd spperently: impressed with the importance of this holy justitution. Having goneluded thie sacred rite, the Prisoner. wos inforsied, that the-hour was now artived when he must be con- ducted to the place of execution, and that the ‘Sheriffs were in attendance go carry that puinfal _part of their duty into instant The cri- replied, "I am perfectly ready—Fem anxi- ©us to diel feel the vear prospect of shall be speedily removed from worldly sufferings und human, persecution; indeed, I feel as if I was in Eledvén He was theii con- to the press-yard to be delivered of his fet= it ters, which were double, and of uncommon dimensions and weight. He descended the steps with a pace, and did not appear to be languid, or weakened by the prescribed regimen. Those who had been admitted by the Sheritfs (among whom were several Noblemen, and Gentlemen of rank) to witness the proceedings in the interior of the prison, followed them inte the vard, which has no covering. The culprit, in crossing it to to the anvil om which the irons were knocked off, viewed the spectators | lc. Sapte Se rs ee with’ perfect calmness, and looking up to the sky, observed, with the greatest nonchalance, "I think we are going to have more rain." He then placed his legs alternately on the anvil, and the operation of cutting the rivets withe out ‘betraying’ the indication of pain. His arms were then pinioned; and he was informfed that if he had any confession or disclosure make now was the time for doing it, as he would not be permitted to address the multitudes but theze being of persons present, on tlié su tionof one of the Sheriffs, the delinquent was removed to an adjoiming room, and only one Gentleman —— nm pl — | - selected from the company allowed to accompany the Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs, and the criminal, we understand, he should utter seditious expressions, which, if propagated, might be productive of mischievous consequences. | was particularly interrogated by the Sheriffs to declare whether he felt contrition for the | { rh | 1 | of the crime for which he was about to suffer, and whether he would acknowledge the justice of his sentence? The criminal's answer was, we umderstand, to the following effect thank God for granting me, on this trying occasion, fortitade | ls meet my fute with composure and cheerful-- feel no remorse whatever for the crime of which I have been convicted—I pity, from the heart, Mrs. Percevai, whom, | been the instrument of makiug a disconsolate widow, and her numerous children whom I have made fatherless—I regard them as I do my own family, whose lot I deplore, and this declaration I wish to be communicated to Mrs. and her family. As to the act imputed to me, my sentiments continue the same, and [trust it will prove an awful example and a salutary-lesson to men in ere &e." The Ordinary. aga arged. his conceiving that as the wretched culprit now be on the verge of nity, he make a confession of guilt and die penitent; but he begged that he might not be atiy more importuned on that subject, as his de- ? 1 > termination, as he had already declared, was un- Finding that as he had perpetrated the atrocious deed without a consciousness of oe — or shame, and was firmly determined io die without remorse, no further attempts were made to induce the obdurate wretch to swerve from his purpose. There being no other preliminary ceremony to go through, the criminal was informed that he must now proceed to the fatal drop. He signified his assent by bowing his head, and was conducted by the executioner along the different passages to the door. Being released from his irons, he walked with  éyility, and pressed forward, as if impatient at the measured steps of the attendants, The same apathy, hurry, and impatience, which had marked the conduct of the criminal in une interior of the were observable in the exe | Preceded by the executioners and followed by the Ordinary, the Sheriffs, &c. he stepped upon the platform precisely at four minutes ?? eight he cast his eyes on the multitude on the left, proceeded with a hurried gait, and with as much indifference as an actor treads the stage, to the spot whence he was to move no more. ‘The put a thin gauze cap on his head, and mounted the steps. 0 | fasten the rope to the beam. While he thus employed, Dr. Forn, with great tenderness, untied the criminal's neck-handkerchief, buttoned his shirt collar, adjusted the rope about his neck, drew the cap-over his face, the features of which were still visible, folded the and bound it over his eyes; but being folded |; us it from his, neck, he begged it might be taken off, and put on only leaving the corner, which was not tied in a knot on his to hang down to his chin. The executioner descended: and removed the steps, inspected the noose and in- retired, feaving the in close coversation with the criminal. What passed eS )\ + 1] 1 i ' it | | t at this awful moment, we could not possibly collect; though within six yards of the parties, | thea repeated, we believe, the Creed, and prayed for one minute with great fervour, He then thanked the Ordinary for his ade 

wearied attention in directing his devotions, and took an affectionate farewell of him. The Ordinary then put up a short ejaculation— pronounced the evangelical blessing— retreated one step, on which the bolt was drawn, the platform dropped while the clock was striking eight, and the criminal instantly sinking nearly three feet, died in a moment, not having by any convulsive moment, not even by the movement of a finger, or by the slightest vacillation, indicated the least symptom of vitality after the jerk, which it is supposed dislocated his neck, and occasioned immediate death.

Thus has the punishment succeeded the crime so quickly, that in a little week the commission of it, the perpetrator has fallen a victim to avenging justice. May Bellingham's ignominious fate deter others from similar atrocity.

The populace did not in the least commiserate the fate of the wretched criminal, who, it was observed, had selected, as an object of his bloodthirsty vengeance, a man possessed of every public and private virtue which could adorn bumanity.

The criminal was dressed the same as upon his trial, viz. in a shabby surtout coat, a striped waistcoat, and dirty linen. His face; too, exhibited the same sallow, cadaverous appearance, and his manner was abrupt and hurried. His wife had not arrived in town, previous to execution, but was momentarily expected from Liverpool. After hanging the usual time, his body was consigned to the surgeons for dissection.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0003467/18070303/013/0002
Limerick Gazette - Tuesday 03 March 1807

LONDON — FEBRUARY 23.

EXECUTION OF THE MURDERES OF MR STEEL

DREADFUL ACCIDENT.

One of the most dreadful accidents for a long time experienced in this city took place this morning, at the execution of Holloway and Haggerty, for the marder of Mr. Steel, and of Elizabeth Godfrey, for the marder of Richard Prince, in front of the Old Bailey. The populace began to assemble so early as five o'clock, aad contin to accumulate until eight. It is supposed that the concourse of people was greater than that at the execution of Governor Wall.

At eight o'clock the wretched culprits ascended the scaffold, Haggerty came forward first, attended by the Rev. Mr. Devereux, a Roman Catholic Clergyman. His deportment was correct and afforded a striking contrast with the brutal ferocity of Holloway. As soon as he appeared upn the scaffold, with a savage voice he exclaimed "I'm innocent, Gentlemen, innocent, no verdict, no verdict!" He seemed hardened, and to make up his mind to what is called *dying game*. The woman followed next, and appeared very penitent. She was dressed in white. As soon as the platform fell, the woman and Holloway appeared dead. Haggerty was extremely convoulsed. Immediately after they were launched off a most dreadful scene took place. The approaches to the place were completely blocked up with carts, filled with spectators, and when some of the crowd began to move away, the pressure became dreadful. Some fell, and others fell over them, they were trampled to death. Terror tookl possession of the crowd, they became desperate, and their efforts only contributed to encrease the danger. The people on the house tops, and in the windows, who saw their error, waved their handkerchicls, and made signals to them to stand quiet, but to no purpose. All was confusion and uproar, the men fighting their way, and the women screaming frightfuily. At twelve o'clock, forty sufferers in this dreadful scene had been carried to St. Bartholomew's hospital, twenty-seven of them dead, and some of the others so bruised, it is impossible they can recover. Four dead bodies were carried to St. Sepuulchre’s Church, viz. Master White, of Portsmouth, aged 16, who boarded at a school at school in Islington. Mr. Guest, the brother of Mr. Guest, the sitversmith, of Fleet Market, aged 18, and two genteel boys, between 14 and 16 years of age.  We have not learned the names of the sufferers in the Hospital, as no admittance was allowed. The doors present a frightful scene, besieged by mothers and other relatives, who missed their chilren aud friends;— among the dead-bodies are those of a well dressed woman, and of a boy. The bowels of the latter were trampled out. There was scarcely a person in the immense crowd, who was not either hurt in person, or lost some part of his or her dress.

During the last act of this tragedy two wretches were secured in the act of robbing, and placed within the circle round the gallows. So incensed were the mob against them, that the constables found much difficulty in preventing the irritated spectators from tearing them to pieces.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002431/18120513/023/0007
Dissenter - Wednesday 13 May 1812

The following circular letter has been addressed to the Commanding officers of the Local Militia:—

(CIRCULAR.) "Whitehall, April 17.

"Sir—There being reason to apprehend, from the various disturbances which have taken place in some of our manufacturing districts, that attempts may be made by evil-disposed persons to seize or destroy the arms belonging to the Local Militia, I am directed by Mr. Secretary Ryder to impress upon you the necessity of adopting the most effectual means for the defence of your Depot, in case any such attempt should be made, and to point out to you the propriety of having the permanent staff of your regiment, under the command of the Adjutant, in such a state of constant efficiency, as to be immediately available for its defence. I am, at the same time, to observe to you, that the Lieutenancy of the County are, by law, obliged to furnish a fit and proper place for the Depot; and, in case the building appropriated to that purpose, should not appear to afford, in its present state, adequate means of resistance, Mr. Ryder has to desire that you will either make immediate application to the Lieutenancy for providing some place of greater strength, or will adopt some practical mode of guarding your present Depot, and of diminishing the possibility of its forcible entry, in order that those who may be lodged in it, may be enabled to repel any sudden attack, until the effectual military assistance, (which means have been taken to provide at the shortest notice) can be brought to their relief."
