# Oliver's Tale


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18170705/008/0003
## Leeds Mercury - Saturday 05 July 1817
p3

### OLIVER THE SPY.-

A fact has come to our knowledge connected with the mission of this arch traitor, which, though it can be communicated in a few words, speaks volumes to the mind of every British subject. On the first arrival of Mr. Oliver in the neighbourhood of *Sheffield*, where he spread terror among the peaceable and well-disposed part of the inhabitants, and by his flattering representations imparted joy and confidence to the disaffected and evil-minded, the vigilance of the magistrates at that place enabled them to trace out his proceedings, and to discover that he was disemminating the poison of his treasons in every direction. The first use made by the magistrates of this discovery was to apprise the conservators of the public peace in other parts of the riding of the arrival of this incendiary, and their next step was to address a letter to the Secretary of State for the home department informing him that a *London Delegate*, a man apparently above the lower ranks, had arrived in the country, and was actively employed in organizing sedition and exciting the people to acts of treason. This letter was written by Hugh Parker, Esq. the senior magistrate of the district, who, by return of post, received an answer from Lord Sidmouth, informing him that the person he described as so dangerous a character was an *Agent of Government !!!* Indignant at this communication, Mr. Parker's first determination was to withdraw his name from the commission of the peace, but his repugnance to shrink from his duty at time of public exigency overcame his detestation of the system which ministers had adopted, and he was prevailed upon to continue those services which have reflected so much honour on his own character, and so much benefit on the country. When Lord Sidmouth's *long promised* statement regarding the employment given by government to a herd of spies and informers makes its appearance, we hope he will indulge the public with the correspondence which passed between his lordship and the Sheffield magistracy. We should be glad too if the Magistrates would publish the examinations taken before the Lord-Lieutenant at Wakefield, on Monday, the 16th. ult. If we are rightly informed, those examinations confirm every material point of the statement regarding Mr. Oliver, made in this paper two days before; and it has been stated distinctly in the House of Commons, that the *only material called for the crown* on that occasion, swore that Mr. Oliver got up, or prepared the whole plot. We beg to direct the attention of our readers to the speech of Mr Bennett on the third reading of the Habeas Corpus Suspension Act, and we should be glad if some Member of the House would move, in his place, for the production of Bradley's evidence.

On this subject Lord Castlereagh has dauntlessly declared that government do employ spies, and has represented them as necessary to the safety of the state. Under an administration such as that formed by his lordship and his co-adjutors this may be the case, but *good* ministers, like *good* princes, require no spies, and the words of Montesquieu, whose skill in the science of politics would not suffer by a comparison with any of the present ministers individually, or with the whole of them collectively, has said:— "Should I be asked whether there is any necessity for spies in monarchies, my answer would be, that the usual practice of good princes is not to employ them. The trade of a spy might perhaps be tolerable were it practised by honest men, but the *necessary* infamy of the person is sufficient to make us judge of the infamy of the thing."

It has been insinuated, that in making the exposure we have exhibited to the public, we have been influenced by factious motives, and that our object has been merely to annoy the servants of the Crown, and to advance the interests of a party. Supposing this to be the case, the motives would not disprove the facts. But we claim the merit of higher influence. That we have our party predilections we are free to confess, but we have much more regard for our country than for our party. It has been stated that we are ultra-reformers, or as the phrase in the *Sun** Newspaper is "reformers of the modern school." This assertion we deny, and we appeal to facts for the veracity of our disclaimer. It is known by every man who has read our sentiments on Parliamentary Reform, as published in this paper, that without presuming to condemn the advocates of universal suffrage and annual parliaments, we have never been the supporter of those measures. It is known too, that at the meeting held in this town for the purpose of voting a Petition to the Legislature on the subject of Parliamentary Reform, we stedfastly and successfully opposed the introduction of a motion for assembling adjourned meetings, maintaining that they had the appearance of holding out a menace to government. It is also known, that when the practice prevailed last year of sending out political missionaries, for the purpose of inculcating the principles of Parliamentary Reform, we openly and perseveringly condemned the policy, and exposed the impropriety of such a proceeding, and it was probably owing to this cause that we never had the honour of a call from MR. OLIVER. It is further known, that we supported to the best of our power the benevolent views of those who, during the past year of general distress, exerted themselves to relieve the labouring classes by providing them food at a reasonable price; and that we pointedly condemned the censure cast upon institutions established for that purpose; but it, is not known, perhaps, though it is nevertheless true,that we never were connected at any time with any political society whatever. In making these statements, we must repeat that we are not to be understood as conveying any censure towards. those who have pursued a different course on any or all the points we have mentioned; we merely state the facts to show that we are neither ultra-reformers nor the slaves of any party. On every subject we act on the decision of our own unbiased opinion, honestly formed, and we claim therefore the credit of having made the exposure of MR. OLIVER, and the spy system, purely on public and patriotic grounds.

We have the satisfaction to conclude this article, by stating a fact, that will be hailed with pleasure by every real friend to social order: Since Mr. Oliver left Yorkshire, perfect tranquility has been restored. The County was never more peaceable. The 13th light dragoons, who had been brought into the West Riding, under an apprehension of an insurrectionary rising, have returned to their quarters at York, and the nightly military patrole has been discontinued. In a word, we are as tranquil now the spies have disappeared, as we were before they came amongst us. The exciting cause has been withdrawn, and the effect has ceased.

See also: https://thespyoliver.blogspot.com/2017/07/5th-july-1817-oliver-spy-in-leeds.html


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18170712/008/0003
## Leeds Mercury - Saturday 12 July 1817
p3

### ORIGIN OF THE LATE CONSPIRACIES.

Several attempts have been made, both in and out of Parliament, to prove that Mr Oliver was merely a *passive* agent in the late conspiracies, formed against Government in the North of England; and that he neither excited the popular discontent, nor gave vitality and organization to the conspiracies. — That this representation of the conduct of the "ministerial agent" is false and deceptive, we have already proved by a host of witnesses. But it is said that these witnesses have all acted under the influence of a disposition to traduce the character of Mr. Legh Keck's *immaculate builder*, and that therefore their evidence is not to be relied upon. This conclusion, we think, does not arise by any means out of the premises. There may, however, be those who are of a different opinion, and to such we beg leave to shoW, out of the mouth of a *Government witness*, that Mr. Oliver was the "Great Man";— that under his directions the *delegates*, so called, were appointed— that he moved and controlled every thing, and that he was, in a word, "the foreman of the concern."

At the examination held at Wakefield on Monday, the 16th of June, before the Lord-Lieutenant, and a full bench of Magistrates, to inquire into the conduct of the ten prisoners apprehended at Thornhill-Lees on Friday, the 6th ult. on a charge of holding a treasonable meeting, a witness, whose name we are not at liberty to mention, was produced for the Crown, and against the prisoners. This witness, who was represented by the accusers to be of unimpeached character, and free from all suspicion, deposed, amongst other matters:—

"That he had seen Oliver twice. That he, Oliver, was considered by all the parties as the *great man* to communicate and direct things from London. That as *he* directed so *they* acted. That the appointment of the delegates was subject to Mr. Oliver's approval, and that on one occasion he objected to a delegate alleging that he was an improper person, because he thought he would tell tales. Mitchrll preceded Oliver and introduced him. This deponent was a delegate himself, and was appointed by a person *who received his instructions from Mr. Oliver*. He believes all the delegates were appointed as he was. The deponent stated, that ten men met at Thornhill Lees; Mr. Oliver was in the lane near the house. He knows that the delegates must have been approved by Oliver; he knows it for a certainty, because Oliver did actually reject one of them. The witness *considered Oliver to be the foreman of the concern*. This witness, who had turned an informer, was taken to Thornhill Lees to identify the delegates, and it was at his suggestion that Oliver was seized, but he, (Oliver), was almost immediately afterwards set at liberty by a person in authority, who said— "he must be liberated, he is the Government spy, or agent, or words to that effect."

For the accuracy of this portion of the evidence, we appeal to the Magistrates present at the examination, and we beg again to press upon their consideration the propriety of laying the whole of the depositions taken on that occasion before the public. If our frequent calls for the details of the proceedings at Wakefield, on the 16th inst. and for the long-promised statement of Lord Sidmouth in justification of the system of *espionage*, has the appearance of pertinacity, we have no other apology to offer for our perseverance than that which arises out of a deep anxiety for the establishment of truth, and a sincere wish to rescue our countrymen from the stigma which has been cast upon their character, it order to find a pretence for suspending their liberties.

[--break--]

On Wednesday se'nnight, two persons, who we understand were a king's messenger and a Bow-street officer, arrived at Wakefield, and arrested Benjamin Scholes, by virtue of a warrant from the Secretary of State, and immediately took him away for London. They starched his house and examined his papers, but did not carry one away with them. This was all done with such secrecy, that the fact was not known beyond the circuit of his family till Friday noon. — *Wakefield Star*

*Charges of Treasonable Practices.*— On Thursday night, a man of the name of Scholes, was brought to London by a King's Messenger and a Bow-street officer, from Wakefield. On Friday Scholes underwent an examination at the Secretary of State's Office for the Home Department, before Lord Sidmouth, the Law Officers, Sir N. Conant, &c. At the same time several others, who had been in custody for some time, were brought from the House of Correction, and underwent an examination. After which Scholes was sent off to Cambridge prison.— On Saturday night, between nine and ten o clock, a King's Messenger and a Bow-Street Officer arrived in town with another man in custody, on a charge of Treasonable Practices, by virtue of a warrant issued against him, signed by Lord Viscount Sidmouth, as Secretary of State. On account of the lateness of the hour, no person was in attendance at the Secretary of State's Office, and no Magistrate being sitting, he was lodged in the House of Correction.

William Wheatley, who was brought to London on Saturday night, was on Monday removed from the House of Correction to the Secretary of State's Office for the Home Department, where he underwent an examination before Lord Viscount Sidmouth, the Law Officers, Sir N. Conant, &c. He was afterwards remanded. The Messenger and Officer brought him from Huddersfield, in Yorkshire.

*Oliver the Spy.*— This fellow, whom no invitation seems likely to drag from his hiding place, is said to be a native of Wales, and a carpenter by trade. He was last summer a prisoner in the Fleet, where he would have been starved, had it not been for some friends to reform— of whom he pretended to be one of the most zealous. He is also a freemason, (but we hope, will not long remain so,) and secretary to the Royal Public Lodge. No. 100, held at Mr. Murphey's, the Golden Hind, little Moorfields. He is a tall good-looking man, near six feet in height, and inclined to be corpulent. He was a few years ago a serjeant in the grenadier company of the Whitechapel volunteers.— *Liverpool Mercury*.

...

Since our last, were committed to York Castle, ... - Also, Thomas Riley, of Crosland Moor, tailor, charged upon the oath of one credible witness, with being accessory before the fact, and procuring, counselling, commanding, or abetting others to bring about and commit certain riots, unlawful assemblies, and felonies, at the parishes of Kirkburton, Almondbury and Huddersfield, or one of them, and which riots, unlawful assemblies, and felonies, took place on the night of the 8th of June last.-Also, Benjamin Green, of Honley, cloth dresser, charged upon the oath of Joshua Kemp, with being present and aiding and assisting in a riot and unlawful assembly, at the township of Honley on Saturday, the 8th of June last, and tumultuously going about, and unlawfully and feloniosly demanding, stealing, taking and carrying away certain fire arms, from the dwelling-houses of Sarah Jessop and others, in Honley aforesaid. Also, Joseph Jysop, of Lockwood, cloth-dresser, charged upon the oath of Charles Earnshaw, with being present and aiding and assisting in a riot and unlawful assembly, and bearing arms, at a place called Folly Hall Bridge, in Huddersfield on the night of Sunday the 8th June last, to the terror of the people, and along with others unknown, and with intent to have done some of his Majesty's liege subjects some grievous bodily harm.





---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18170719/010/0003
## Leeds Mercury - Saturday 19 July 1817
p3

### THE HUDDERSFIELD INSURRECTION

An inflated and highly exaggerated account of the state of the town and neighbourhood of Huddersfield, during the past month, has been published in the Leeds Intelligencer, and copied into the London Ministerial papers. Such a publication, on the eve of the trial at York, we hold to be extremely reprehensible, and must, as far as it is believed, have a tendency to prejudice the minds of the jury appointed to sit in judgement upon the lives of the accused. To assert in a public print before the trials come on, and of course on *ex parte* evidence, that the object of the prisoners was "massacre," and that their plans were to be consummated by "plunder, fire, and carnage, to a fearful extent," is to prejudge their cause, and to deprive these unfortunate men of the benefit of that salutary maxim of the English law, which holds every man to be innocent till a jury of his countrymen has pronounced him guilty. Without pretending to be at all in the secrets of the insurgents, we must say, we have too favourable an opinion of our species and of our countrymen, to believe that any numerous body of them in a particular neighbourhood, could be brought to be the actors in a sedition, that was to inflict "massacre, plunder, fire, and carnage," upon their neighbours, "to a fearful extent." The intention of the insurgents, as far as we can learn, was to effect a "bloodless revolution," and the purpose of seizing and *disarming* the military, as stated is the account before us, seems to favour that supposition. That a bloodless revolution could have been effected, is, to be sure, a supposition too gross to be entertained by any set of men of common understanding; but Mr. Oliver, it seems, had the address to persuade the leaders that a project of this kind was practicable, and his dupes were so utterly ignorant as to adopt the absurdity. This fact may serve to shew of what kind of materials the Huddersfield branch of the conspiracy was formed. How many men and boys (for there was, it seems, a considerable proportion of the latter) assembled at *Folly*-hall-bridge, near Huddersfield, on the night of the 8th, we cannot learn with any degree of certainty, but some estimate may be formed of their strength from the fact, that a detachment of newly-raised Yeomanry Cavalry put to flight and entirely dispersed the insurgent army! while the only blood that flowed on the occasion on either side, was the blood of a horse, and the only other mark of violence inflicted was, as the Intelligencer states, the mark of a bail which struck a deserted house! We do not wish to speak with levity of a proceeding which every friend to his country must condemn, but when we see a local act of popular violence, exaggerated to the bulk of a wide spreading insurrection, we feel it to be our duty to remove the deception, by lowering down the colouring to the standard of truth.

We have hitherto cautiously abstained from entering into the details of the violent proceedings in the neighbourhood of Huddersfield on the night of the 8th of June, satisfying ourselves with stating from time to time the committals of the prisoners to the County gaol; and this course we should have pursued, leaving the facts to be developed upon the trials, had not the exaggerated statements made in the Intelligencer induced us to depart from that determination. It now, however, becomes proper to state, that ever since the year 1812, when the Luddite system prevailed in Yorkshire, and raged more especially in the South-western plots of this Riding, there has been considerable irritation existing in the minds of some of the lower classes in the neighbourhood of Huddersfield. This disposition, the extreme distress suffered by the labouring part of the community during the past year, tended materially to increase. For a time, the hope of Parliamentary Reform allayed the public dissatisfaction, by affording some prospect of relief, and petitions for that purpose were drawn up and signed very generally; but no sooner was the Bill for the suspension of the *Habeas Corpus* Act passed into a law, then hope gave place to despair; and soon after, a number of designing men, seizing the opportunity, did not hesitate to inculcate the opinion, that nothing short of a revolution could terminate the general suffering. Of these pestilent characters, the notorious Mr. Oliver was one of the principal; and we have the authority of the wife of one of the persons mentioned in the Intelligencer as a principal conspirator (George Dawson), delivered in the presence of three respectable witnesses, for saying that as long since as nearly two months ago, Oliver was in communication with the ring-leaders of the sedition, and that on one occasion he was a visitor at Dawson's house. On the same authority we state, that Mr. Oliver had held conferences with George Taylor, the leader of the mal-content forces, on the night of the 8th of June, and it is known that both Dawson and Taylor have since absconded. How Oliver conducted himself in his visits to Huddersfield, may be collected from the testimony of Dawson's wife, who says, that one morning, while she was at breakfast at Dawson's house, Oliver, among other inflammatory conversation, said -" They are all in readiness, in London. There is no occasion for bloodshed. We have only to seize the military and disarm them, and the thing is done." He added, that he had been concerned with Despard; that just before the Colonel and his associates were apprehended, he was going into a private room with them, but recollecting that he had a little business of his own to transact, he stepped out. and had not been gone half an hour, before they were all taken.

Under this kind of excitation, it is no wonder that the persons to whom such conversation was addressed, began to form traitorous designs, or rather perhaps, to cherish hopes that designs already formed might be realized. The leaders, it appears, held frequent communications with the subordinate agents. The plot thickened daily. A considerable number of men in the lowest ranks of life became involved in the conspiracy. Sunday night, the 8th of June, was appointed for the rising. Two or three hundred persons, it is said, many of them boys from 14 to 20 years, assembled at a place bearing the appropriate name of *Folly*-hall-bridge. Taylor placed himself at their head, and at 12 o'clock, the moment for commencing operations, this fanatic addressed his followers in these terms "Now, my lads, all England is in arms-our liberties are secure— the rich will be poor, and the poor will be rich." To this rabble a detachment of six Yeomanry Cavalry was at first opposed, and we verily believe that had the cavalry , small as their number were, thought proper to advance, they would have routed the insurgents, They however judged it prudent to retreat, and being reinforced by a body of their comrades, they returned to witness the dispersion of an unorganized mob that had been drawn together, some by actual force, others by an idle curiosity, and others, no doubt, with criminal designs. In the mean time, a sort of under-plot was acting, and a number of marauders were passing about the neighbourhood, forcing the peaceable inhabitants to open their doors and surrender their fire-arms. At Honley, they broke into the house of Mr. Armitage, who observed that one of the bandits seemed better dressed than his associates,that he was not like one of this country-men, and that he talked like a Londoner."

The Magistrates, who appear to have displayed a more than ordinary share of vigour, soon found means to discover and to arrest a number of the persons engaged in these criminal excesses, and twenty-four of them have been committed to York Castle, to take their trials at the Assizes, which commence this day, while about half that number still remain in confinement in the prison at Huddersfield. It is much to be regretted that the persons apprehended, and about to be put upon their trials, have for the most part, been, at most, merely the dupes of the leaders of this miserable conspiracy, and that the instigators, including Mr. Oliver, the London delegate, have been suffered to escape.

*Mr. Oliver's Cypher.*—  It appears from the evidence of the principal witness for the Crown given before the Lord Lieutenant and the Magistrates at Wakefield, on Monday, the 16th of June, that Mr. Oliver corresponded with his dupes in cypher, and that one of the mottos used by him for that purpose was—  *"The Old Mother is sick, and expects all her sons to arm."*

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000076/18170719/006/0002

## Leeds Mercury - Saturday 19 July 1817
p2

### MINISTERIAL JUSTIFICATION OF OLIVER

*(From the Times)*

In the House of Commons on Friday, in a debate on the State of the Nation, Mr. H Addington said, he had risen principally with a view of doing justice to a much injured individual—he meant Mr. Oliver. (*hear, hear*.) Within this fortnight two magistrates within the county of York, who had received an unfavourable impression as to the conduct of Mr. Oliver in the country, had requested that he might undergo an examination at the office for the Home Department. One of these magistrates came from Yorkshire on purpose. and the other was a much respected member of that House, whose absence he regretted, as that gentleman would have corroborated the statement he had to make. These magistrates took the examination; the individual who brought the charge was confronted with Mr. Oliver, and the result was, that both magistrates declared themselves completely satisfied that the charge was false. that there was not indeed the smallest foundation for supposing that he had provoked the insurrection in the country; and that there had been nothing blameable either in the language or conduct of the person thus accused. It was his duty to make this statement, because the facts could only be made known to the house through him. Mr. Oliver had taken no part in any plots. He came to the Home-office in the beginning of April, and offered information which he considered beneficial to the country, but which he had not obtained by being implicated in any conspiracy. He asked no reward, and never received a shilling from Government, except what served to defray his travelling expenses. Information had been transmitted to the Home-office, that the insurrection which had been attempted was to break out on the 9th or 10th of June. All the magistrates in the disturbed districts. who had written on the subject, agreed in fixing upon the same date. The duty required of Mr. Oliver was to go to the country to ascertain whether this report was correct, and to transmit to the Home-office what information he might collect. This, it was supposed, would save time to the magistrates and the information, it was thought, would be more speedily collected than by relying solely on the separate communications of the magistrates. He carried letters of recommendation to five or six magistrates, and was ordered to return by the 5th of June, as by that time it was necessary that the Executive Government should be prepared with the precautions against the imminent danger which threatened the peace of the country. Mr. Oliver, however, stayed by accident a day or two beyond the limited time; and he had himself written a letter to hasten his return. When Mr. Oliver came to the office and offered to give evidence, he declared he did so in the hope of saving the country; and he was fully persuaded of his sincerity.

*Mr. Barham* doubted much whether the country, or even that House, would concur in the judgement of acquittal which the secret tribunal to which the Right Hon. Gent. referred had pronounced on the spy Oliver. Those who had not the advantage of having been present at the secret tribunal, must decide on the facts already within their knowledge. For his part, he should declare that his judgment could not be on the favourable side, when he recollected what he had heard from a departed Right Honourable friend of his, whose memory had been so justly eulogized that night. Mr. Ponsonby (who it will be recollected was a member of the Secret Committee) had told him, that he believed, in his conscience, the insurrection would not have taken place had it not been for Oliver. He had been so struck with this observation, that he asked his Right Hon. Friend to repeat what he had stated, and he did repeat it.

*Frame-breaking*.-The *Gazette* of Tuesday night contains the Proclamation of the Prince Regent, offering an amnesty to the persons concerned in the offence of frame-breaking, except in the case of the outrage at Loughborough; the intention of issuing which was announced by Lord Sidmouth on the discussion of the Frame-breaking Bill in the House of Lords. After alluding to the increase of punishment annexed to this offence by the Act recently passed, and expressing a hope that persons will thus be deterred from the future commission of such offences, the Proclamation proceeds—

" We do hereby promise and declare, that every person who hath committed any offence against the form of the Statute made in the fifty-fourth year of his Majesty's reign, for the punishment of persons destroying stocking or lace-frames, but hath not yet been charge therewith, and who shall, previous to the first day of September next ensuing, appear before some Justice of the Peace or Magistrate and declare such his offence, and when, where, and by whom the same was committed, shall receive his Majesty's most gracious pardon for such offence, and that no confession so made by any such person shall be given in evidence in any Court, or in any case whatever; provided nevertheless, that nothing herein contained shall extend to the offence so committed at Loughborough as afore said, nor to any other offence, except such as may have been committed contrary to the said Statute made in the fifty-fourth year aforesaid."
