# Frank Ward Libel


## Ward Libel

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000365/18171129/016/0004
Carlisle Patriot - Saturday 29 November 1817

HISTORY OF THE DERBYSHIRE INSURRECTION. [From the Observer Newspaper.] B g We shall proceed to our readers W more authentic, well as more minute account Erin- riot and progress of the insurrection, connected itfi KKvhs with almost all the manufacturing towns in the B kingdom, than has hitherto been published: fromH whence the public will enabled form a just estimate! the real character of the danger by which the country threatened, and the absolute necessity which was imposed upon the ministers the home department to diamine- upon the appointment of the commissions Derby. The sources of our authority, although extended over a considerable part the disturbed counties, are highly respectable, and we can pledge ourselves for the correctness of every fact which shall state. appears that ever since the early part of the French Revolution, and subsequent the suppression of the Corresponding societies, there existed throughout this kingdom number of disaffected characters, who. although few when compared with the great mass the pt-ople, yet found wa\ s propagate their mischie- KHvous doctrines by a variety of means—by the circulation seditious publications, and the use inflammagatory language wherever opportunity safely offered, excite a contempt for the government,K to induce opinion of the necessity change of things;—or to speak more intelligible language—gj a revolution ! the sentiments these men thereß were many converts, and the history our own times Elurnishes with some important attempts to form fig something like systematic plan for furthering thisE nefarious object; among which, the case ColonelS and his associates must yet fresh in the recollection of our readers. The vigilance of theU however, aided by the activity the police, fortunately prevented the formation of any thing like fig formidable confederacy, and thus for a time the plots | of the conspirators were frustrated. I Although suppressed for the time, the demon discord still lurked secret, and at th.e earliest tunity new etibrts were made prepare the minds of the people for some great changc; every event which could by fair reasoning, or otherwise, draw the govern- into disrepute, was seized with avidity the partizans of treason, and applied them to further *9 '.heir ultimate views. Resolutions were passed, and® works published, all tending to the same end, and fact, indirectly although not openly, pointing cut the » nation at large the necessity its relieving itself from jg the coercion of its existing rulers. Thus matters went gradually forward till 1812: societies were formed various parts the country of those persons who had j®| Simbibed the revolutionary principles which had beer industriously disseminated, and who were disposed with every ordinance which trenched upon were pleased call their natural rights. M y this period the dispute arose between the masterH and frame-work . r.t Nottingham, which K gave rise to the association of persons called Luddites. H <4 The outrages commuted these miscreants need noB repetition; they art stiU engraven on the recollection fl everv feeling mind. The Loddites, it will be recol-B formed into divisions, and were extremely M |*numerouii. The great leaders were, however, stationed in the town of Nottingham, and were divided into twofl a-bodies, called committee council, or advice, and R>executive committee. The former consisted of men education and experience, who took ujwn thcm-H deliberate upon what acts of atrocity it were should done; and the latter, who were desperateß characters, distinguished for firmness of nerve fedaring boldness, were the persons appointed perform any work which the former might dircct, however \ wicked; and it well known that the work of death fl | was them a familiar and a willing task. From these continued their secret pursuits!] I without receiving an effectual check, and gaining con-fl ifidence in proportion to their success, became determined in their enterprises till the reception which B they received Loughborough, (where, in the daring attack upon a factory, 14 were taken, and were subse-B quently tried and executed at Leicester), gave them afl R check. Previous this latter event, politics werefl introduced among the Luddites; who, although in the fl first instance, associated only for the purposes revenge, connected with their own immediate trades, fl now rendered their compact more important direct-fl ing their views to a wider field, namely, the overthrowfl of (fee government; plan which received thegrcaterfl encouragement from the supposed invincibility of theirfl numbers, and the secrecy of their machinations. Corre-B spondences were opened with some of the disaffected B societies in London, Manchester, Sheffield, Wakefield,B Birmingham, and elsewhere; and where business could not done by means of letters, deputies were seut, fl with full powers to coalesce, and to advise upon general N groundx. The return Of these deimties to Nottingham gave the most flattering hopes to the Luddites, for found that feeling of discontent was very widely pre-fl valent among the manufacturing and labouring popu-B lation of the kingdom, which wanted buta little encou-fl raxement to tendered subservient to the great er.d—fl Revolution. E The distrcMea which were encountered this season the poorer classes, from various cames—fant offl employment, Karcity of provisions, &*. were seized fl upon the partisan!of sedition a* drcumctaoccs preg-fl 11 ant with the most important consequences their views. The minds of the people became naturally soured and discontented, and in fact they were willing to ascribe their sufferings to any cause which a specious [mind might suggest. Thus it was, then, that they swallowed with avidity the publications of that day, which told them that all their miseries were attributable the want of parliamentary reform ; and they had hesitation adopting the system of forming themselves into Hampden Clubs, for the purpose of petitioning parliament for a redress of their grievances, as recommended Major Cartwright. means desire it to believed, however, that it is our opinion that the worthy Major was aware of the net in which he was himself inclosed, or that he coincided in the real objects of those whom his plans were strenuously recommended. Hampden Clubs were now formed in almost every village throughout the kingdom, and their numbers clearly ascertained. The meetings and the declarations the Hampden Club the Freemasons' Tavern, l.ondon, were regularly noticed, and the parties assembled there were held out to the village clubs as co-operating in the general plans—a very powerful incitement, it must admitted, ignorant minds,—and ably applied by those who felt and were desirous increasing its importance. In fact, Sir Francis Burdett and M ajor v.-cre regarded the leaders of all the minor associations Thus matters went on through the autumn of IS! It. Nothing particular was done except petitions and enlarging the clubs. November, ISKi, printed resolutions were circulated throughout the counties of Oerby, Nottingham, Leicestershire, Yorkshire, and, in fact, through all the club districts, a most inflammatory description and it to be openly announced, and particularly by the Leicestershire* party, that nothing less than the total overthrow of the government would satisfy the people. Declaration* were made to this effect the Hampden Cmb, llcbt. Best wick and M'Keswick (now a convict), the president and. secretary, early in December. The same spirit soin spread to the other Hanioden Clubs, and it was openly asserted that good could done without a change of King and Government. The subject was first discussed at the Nag's Head, Heames hut was afterwards more fully entered upon at the meeting houses at Ripley, Wingfield, and at all the surrounding villages. Delegates were sent to Manchester and Leeds, to learn how was determined to act there, and was then ascertained that it had been resolved to send up their petitions to London by delegates, and not post, or through the members for their respective districts, as first intended, William Smith, Ripley, who has absconded, and ■ Thomas Bacon (a convict), now openly declared theni- converts to opimon, that the Hampden 8 Clubs were of use—that their petitions would not ■ heard—and that if they expected any thing to adone, the people must organized and arm-d. The ■ Hampden Club principles, they said did not strike at 2the root of the evil. A delegate from Manchester, ■ named Benbow, now arrived Pentridgc, and having ■ persuaded the club to draw up a petition, induced g Bacon to agree to take it up to London, and attend the ■ meeting of delegates there. Bacon accordingly went gup London about the middle of January, and was the delegate meeting. And here it may not She improper to mention, that this very man, Bacon, was forced to fly the country about years back, when the militia bill first passed, in consequence of his being Hdetected in distributing seditious papers among the people, inciting them oppose the execution of the act. On Bacon's arrival in London, and introduction to other delegates, lie was extremely well received: it was agreed among themselves that it was not very likely their petitions would be attended to, and in fact many Sot' them were prepared in printed form, purposely that they might rejected. The public meetings which were held these men were found not answer their object altogether, and private meetings were upon. For this purpose a private room was taken, where a select few met, and here it was resolved ■that on their return to their several clubs they should X point out the ineflicacy of petition, and the absolute Knecessity of preparing aimed force; in fact, it was ■ resolved that " physical strength " should be resorted without delay. Tom Bacon, who was present secret deliberations, his return to Pentridge, all these things to his confidential friends, and ■ produced drawings of pikes and other implements □destruction, which had been approved in London, from ■ the facility with which they could manufactured. | A new course of proceeding now commenced, me stings were held arrange the mode of rising, and to prepare Barms and ammunition. The Nottingham men, ■ Luddites, became more active than ever, and it was ■ partially resolved by them to rise of themselves, without ■ any regard to the Londoners, who had become more ■cautious from their failure on the 2nd December. The executive committee of the Luddites now became important body. have already described them as men capable any act however daring, and from them it was resolved to select leaders to bring forward the forces from the neighbouring counties Nottingham, which was to the seat the new government; and lirandirt/i, who was one of the executive committee, was appointed to take the command of the Pentridge, Wingfield, and division. a At the private meetings at which Tom Bacon presided, declared that was quite determined the insurrection should take place on the Monday after Sir jji' 1 . liurdett's motion respecting parliamentary reform, land he exhorted his partizans to make every effort for day. Beside the private meetings, general mtetfjings were held, to which the minor meetings made their I reports. The first of these general eon unit tees embraced Nottingham, Leicester, and Derby, which Tom Bacon was ;; member. The second took in Birmingham, Wolverhampton, and all the population that district; the third, Leeds; the fourth, Manchester; the fifth, Iliuklcrsfield; and throughout all the manufacturing counties. From mihcae general meetings delegates were appointed, ■ form a central committee of execution, which assem- at the Joiners' Arms, Wakefield; and thus an uninterrupted and intelligible communication was kept lap with the conspirators in all directions, and unity of gdesign secured. During February and March, the central meeting delegates continued their deliberations. Reports were to them from their respective districts of the Inumbers ready to rise; the pike heads manufactured ; arms procured; the depots established; the stores collected; the barracks open to assault inspected; the of military under arms ascertained ; and all those necessary details by which a judgment of the | probability of success might be formed. At central meeting held in the middle of March, an order was made, that the delegates should assemble again the sth of May, and report what was the number of staunch friends who were ready at all risks lise—and what were their positive means of action. It was also determined that Mitchell should be sent to London to ascertain what number of men might depended upon there, anil who would come forward in case the insurrectional experiment was made in the country. Mitchell accordingly set off for London, and found his way to Pendrill, the boot-maker, in Newgate-street, who it will recollected was one the speakers in Spa-fields, and who it has since been discovered harboured Young Watson until his escape board the Venus. Pendrill was in state of despair, and was preparing leave England—and now for the first time does the name of Oliver bccome any way connected with these transactions. Mitchell found Oliver with Pendrill assisting him in making up his books. Oliver had been in the secret of the London conspiracy, and was aware why Pendrill was about to fly. There was no reserve with him, as was thought to one of the party, and Mitchell opened the object his mission; asking at the same time, what force it was thought London might produce ? said thought the same number that had assembled Spa-fields, namely, 70,000. If the rising took place the country, doubt the same number would rise again in London. Mitchell remained in town some time, and he says himself, had interviews with Sir Francis Burdctt, Major Cartwright, and Mr. Hunt, the state the country, and was of opinion, that there M as every hope success. Mitchell und Oliver mutually endeavoured to persuade not to to America, but to and sec what would the result the rising. however, said his mind was made up : thought the government too strong but the same time he said if Mitchell would take Oliver with him through the country, and meet him at Liverpool—if Oliver then made a favourable report of appearances, might induced stop. This was agreed upon. Pendrill went on with the winding up his affairs, and Mitchell continued for some time consulting with some of tire London party. W« come now that period when Oliver first introduced himself Lord Sidinouth. Oliver, it appears agreeing with his friend Pendrill the improbability of attending any further efforts the part the diniffccted, from feelings which will not examine, determined to wait upon Lord With this view accordingly prepared letter stating / *•' ' the nature the information hud to give, and the services which he might yet have it in his power to perform. This letter took himself to the Home Office, and it was delivered to Lord His Lordship, from information already in his possession, knew that the contents of the letter were part correct, and therefore had hesitation in accepting Oliver's services. The latter was accordingly introduced his Lordship, and in the course of subsequent interview's a plan of proceedings was determined upon, with view to frustrate the intended insurrections. The first introduction of Oliver took place towards the latter end of March, and the 25th of April Oliver and Mitchell,(the latter not suspecting the views of his associate) quitted London together the mail. They passed through Birmingham Derby, where tlicy remained not more than ten minutes; but during this time Mitchell introduced Oliver to Mr. Hobertshaw, at the Talbot Inn, his particular friend. This was the of April, and the whole matter occurred while the horses of tire mail were changing. They went on that night Sheffield, and the next day Wakefield, Dewsbury, and different places, Mitchell introducing Oliver as a delegate from London. This was the case at a meeting held'at Scholes's, the Joiners' Arms at Wakefield. In his way Oliver was carried about different meetings, till the sth of May. On this day the central meeting took place, in pursuance of adjournment, at the Joiners' Arms, Wakefield, when the different delegates attended, and made their returns of the physical strength of their respective districts, disposed to run all risks. Birmingham district was represented to be able to furnish a force of 150,000 men, Sheffield 10,000. Tom Bacon gave in as the forces of Derby, Nottingham, and Leicester; and 30,000 more, if wanted. Mitchell reported London as having a force of 70,000, and so on each delegate reported the effective numbers of the disaffected in his division. Whether Oliver was at this meeting not, is not certain ; but he soon after quitted Wakefield, and went to Liverpool see Pendrill, to whom he reported his observations. Pendrill said was satisfied that all was going well; hut lie not sufficiently satisfied remain see the issue of the struggle, and theretore chose to set sail for America. Mitchell was now taken into custody, and Oliver returned to London, making his way through Bradfoul, Leeds, and Nottingham. On his arrival at Nottingham, which place (lie*had been told at Wakefield) Tom Bacon was the representative at the central meeting there, went out enquire for him while the coach passengers were dining, but no such person was known in the town; Bacon being, fact, a resident at Pentviuge, and Oliver being entirely ignorant of who really was: a circumstance which falsifies the intimacy said to subsist between Oliver and Bacon. Oliver left London again the 23rd May, and being now without his former companion, Mitchell, could only pursue the track through which Mitchell had taken him. knew nobody except through Mitchell's introduction. his arrival at Birmingham, found tilings going as had been stated the central meeting. The delegates being completely conjoined, the 25th May, Sunday, lie reached Derby, and went to Robertshaw's. lie was too late for the family dinner, and was shewn into a privateroom ; whilst there, Bobertshaw came in, and accosting him, said, his face was familiar to him upon which, Oliver reminded him of his having been introduced him some time before by Mitchell. Some conversation then took place Mitchell's fate, and other topics; and Oliver having expressed a wish be introduced Nottingham, sent for two or three persons with that vie\v, one of whom, -Mr. Birkin (now custody), came, and a good deal conversation passed. Oliver was afterwards introduced into the public room Robertshaw's, see what sort of people were there; he, however, confined himself to reading the paper there, and did not appear to have any knowledge of Birkin, who sat opposite him, and who, it was agreed, should appear not to have seen before. The next day, the of May, Birkin accompanied Oliver to Nottingham, and introduced him to the secret committee assembled there, among whom were Ilaynes, Holmes, Grosvenor, Heuson, and Frank Ward. At this time Oliver did not know a human being Nottingham, and only got to the committee through the medium of Birkin, after undergoing strict examination two different flours before reached the third, > which the conspirators occupied. was introduced by Birkin old friend, and was informed by the committee that they were heady. this, as former occasions, Oliver's first act was to go the magistrates, and inform them of the objects lie had in view and these afterwards communicated the result of his enquiries. Tuesday he set off' again for Yorkshire, and reported to the Sheffield magistrates what had heard, in the same manner had done Birmingham and Nottingham. From Sheffield he went to Halifax, Manchester, and Liverpool, and returning through Manchester, proceeded to Leeds. In all those towns had communications both with the insurgents and the magistrates; ascertaining from the one the extent of their arrangements, and preparing the others for the worst that might happen. was the he reached Leeds, and was taken Thornhill Lees by Sir John Byng's cavalry, is already well known. got from them, and went to the Joiners' Arms, where he saw Scholes, who accompanied him to the Leeds mail. By this time the Wakefield party began suspect him to be spy, and they were once confirmed in their suspicions by Major servant coming up and delivering him letter while sitting in the mail. They instantly'flew back, and, may naturally supposed, great pains were taken turn the tables, and exclaim it was this government spy that had originated all the plots and conspiracies. Upon this, however, the evidence now clear as to leave no doubt the mind of every rational man. The truth was, that was employed solely to obtain all the information could; and so far was he from urging the rising, that the parties in custody accuse him of proposing delay, as the fact was, and thereby frustrating their object. Saturday night, the 7th of June, reached Nottingham, and finding his friend Birkin, was introduced to the committee: to them he related the particulars of his escape; but having previously put off'the rising from the night after Sir Francis Burdett's motion to the June (which induccd the Nottingham party, conceiving they were strong enough for their own business, to determine rise the night the Oth) suspicions were entertained that was spy. Haynes particularly urged this, and it was resolved, that should assassinated ; but he got away that night, and was .ondon next day. Thus have conducted Oliver through all his meanderings, and at least shewn, that although acquainted with the plan of the Derbyshire insurrection, be was in respect concerned its formation the whole system having been matured before Mitchell's arrival at Pendrill's shop in London, where Oliver was first introduced him. The alarm soon sprtad in the North: the central meeting being broken up, all were a loss how to act. The system of co-operation was broken, and thus that compact which might have laid prostrate England's happiest hopes, was completely broken up. We have already stated the fact of the Nottingham committee being dissatisfied with the delay proposed by Oliver, the part of the London insurgents, and of their having come to a determination, at all events, to call faith their forces the l>th of June. pursuance of this resolution, Brandreth, the Nottingham captain, was selected fit man to conduct the men of and the adjoining parishes to Nottingham. His firmness had been tried, and his courage unquestioned, on some trying occasions: he was accordingly furnished with a map of the county of Derby, and the different poets which was assemble his forces pointed out. He then received his final orders to be with his men, armed in the best way could, Nottingham Forest, at two o'clock the morning of the 10th. He set out in company with Tom Bacon, and never afterwards returned to Nottingham. This was on the of June, and from that day till the Bth, he was actively engaged paying visits Swanwick, Belper, Alfreton, and other villages in the neighbourhood, ascertaining the number of the insurgents, and giving directions where they were to assemble the 9th. slept two nights the White Horse, kept by Mrs. Weightman, Bacon's sister, and a third night at a friend's house at Heage. j the as was stated on the trial, he was the whole day at the White Horse; and the next night, those disgraceful scenes, which were stated the trial, took place. It does uot appear, that in any one instance, Brandreth ever saw Oliver, even heard that such a person was in existence, until he was sent to prison. I a singular fact, and may be here stated, that 3t the execution the Luddites Leicester, who were tried the Spring Assizes, these unhappy men confessed, that plan had beccn formed for insurrection unci rebellion, and that the Old Neds (meaning Ned Liuldn were to command. Some of the moet desperate these had been pointed out the barracks, and perform other dangerous duties. Frank Ward, Grosvenor, Henson, and Hayncs, were all appointed to command, and hud proceeded to their several stations. The insurgent force, drawn out Nottingham Foifit, far exceeded any tiling that appeared in evidence. There was not single mode of approach the town on the night of the !)th, which was not guarded, and watchword used ; and large bodies armed were dispersed and down waiting for the Pcntridge and other men, who had been delayed various causes; hut probably most effectually the weather, which was extremely unfavourable. Brandreth is accused having delayed too long in breaking into houses, and having suffered day break before lie reached Eastwood. Among the insurgents at Bacon seems to have been the most active and zealous leader. When the seditious meeting act passed, their meetings were held privately at Asherfield's barn and elsewhere; and here Bacon used every argument to ensure confidence; lie paid visits Manchester, Birmingham, and other manufacturing towns, bringing back the most Haltering accounts the preparations those places. Three blood horses were ready on the road from Nottingham, convey the intelligence of success to Birmingham. addition to these details are in possession a more minute description of the plots and intentions of the Nottingham committee, well the secret meetings held in the neighbourhood of Pentridgc and South Wingfield, preparatory the rising, but our limits preclude us from giving them insertion. In substance they held out promise of establishing constitution formed on that of the United Suites of America, at the head of which several distinguished public characters were to be placed, whose names, they had connection with the party, is unnecessary to give. The question respecting the mode of disposing of the Brunswick family was not decided, old Bacon having said it would time enough to settle the point when they were their possession. Nottingham was to the capital, and towards maintaining this post, all the insurgents were to direct their strength. Then .Manchester, Birmingham, Leeds, Sheffield, &c. were all send their forces thither, in order that they might properly organized. Diversions were be made in other directions, to distract the attention ministers, and the soldiers were every where to be encouraged by the most liberal offers to join the people. The vermin proposed to be killed by the Pent ridge conspirators consisted Colonel a, 1 ton, and a numerous lis* of respectable magistrates. We have now brought our historical sketch of these interrcsting transactions to close: and from this it evidently appears, that the plans and arrangements for a general insurrection, however made or however farcical, were nevertheless extensive, and well calculated, if not opposed in the manner we have described, to produce well-grounded fears for the peace society, at least for a time; for we never can believe that success would have long attended the efforts of such a motley multitude. Notwithstanding, even a temporary ascendancy might have produced consequences which the country would ever have had deplore. 


Below also in 

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000172/18180124/008/0001
Leicester Chronicle - Saturday 24 January 1818

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002757/18180125/017/0003
Constitution (London) - Sunday 25 January 1818

TO THE EDITOR OF THE CONSTITUION

A Letter similar to the following was sent to the Editor of the *Observer* a few weeks ago, requesting him to publish it; but I believe he has never given it publicity. I hope, Sir, you will not refuse me that justice which my accuser has denied, viz. an aooportunity of making my own defence. I am, &c.

Nottingham, Jan. 17, 1818  
F, WARD


TO THE EDITOR OF THE OBSERVER. Sir,—In your Paper of the 18th . of November, you affect to give your Readers a detailed account ci the origin and progress of the Derbyshire Insurrec; tien, which took place on the 9th of June, and in your Preface on that subject, you observe, " The sources of our authority, although extended over a considerable part of the disturbed counties, are highly respectable, and we can •pledge ourselves for the correctness of every fact which we shall state." There is no doubt, Sir, but your agents are respectable, and -their statement correct.—llowever, I hope you will forgive me if I examine the " correctness" of some of the facts you have there given. You affirm, "at this perind (1812) the dispute arose between the Master Ilosiers and the Frame-works knitters at Nottingham, which gave rise to the association of persons called Luddites." It is a well-known fact, that the dispute 'above . alluded to, took- place more than a year before the period there specified, as several frames were broke in 1811. You further add, " Fourteen. Luddites were taken, and were subsequently tried and executed at . Leicester." Now, Sir, as there has Essen but seven Luddites executed at that place for frame-breaking since the affair at Loughborough; the other seven malefactors whom you have added may, perhaps, be some of the ails: hireling Journalists, with which this unhappy country so much abounds, who, for their lying and defamation, have met with that reward which they had so long merited. You say, "In November, 1817, printed Resolutions were circulated throughout the counties of Derby, Not tingham, &c. &c. of a mostinflammatory description." I need not inform you that this was several months after all, or most of the Hampden Clubs in the try - try were annihilated, the Derbyshire insurrection quelled, and when seseral of the parsons connected with that unhappy transaction had been tried, some executed, and others left under sentence of death.— " The subject (over -turning the Government) first discussed at the Nag's head, at Hermes, but was afterwards more fully entered upon at the Methodist Meeting-houses, for almost all the parties were Methodists, at Ripley, Witigfield, and at all the surrounding villages." Now, Sir, here is enstiter instance of your ignorance of the subjects of which you are treating. It is evident you know 'willing of those innocent people you are attempting to ea • lumniate. The Methodist attachment to the present Government is obvious to every impartial ot w rver, nay, their loyalty is become proteinial amOng the Dissenters, and yet you have the audscity le say, the subject of the overthrow of Gov.rnment was 'cussed at the Methodist Meeting-houses, for " almost all the parties were Methodists a! "Wingfield, and at all the surrounding villages." I have no doubt but you wish your Readersto infer that all or most of the persons who were immediately concerned in the Derbyshire Insurrection were Methodists. This is a base attempt to calumniate ; I never was nor perhaps newer shall he, a Methodist, s et I but feel for injured innocence. " They (Oliver and MITCHELL) went on that night to Sheffield, the next day to Wakefield, Tewksbury, and different places." No doubt, Sir, but your exteesive geographical knowledge scans at first glance the situation not only of Wakefield, but Tewksbury , and the different places alluded to ;• so that you are well aware the former is a place near Leeds, in Yorksitite. and the latter in the county of G!oncester ; although these places may appear rattier distant from each other, yet there is nodoubt but the means of conves =ince was adequate to the emergency of the case. From the following sentence, viz., " MITCHELL introduced Oliver as a Delegate from London," it is reasonable to infer, that a considerable potion of their time was occupied in calling on different persons : when this was taken into the account with the distance they had to travel, some persons would be ready to ask how were those Gentlemen conveyed from place to place in so short a space of lime ? Were they taken in a patent balloon, made partly of silk, and covered with Newspapers, edited by hireling Journalists ? for the productions of such persons are generally so much lighter than air, that they would be a necessary acquisition in order to convey swiftly such an enormous load as Oliver, and the weight of guilt which rested upon his head, and anticipated hungry gore-stained hands. You go on to observe, that on " the 27th of May, BIRKIN accom panied Oliver to Nottingham, and introduced him to the Secret Committee assembled there, .among whom were llAvatEs, HOLMES,. GitosVENott, ElEasosr,and FRANK WARD." pe r h aps are not aware how week and contemptible you make yourself appear by this ridiculous statement.: the two persons whom you have 'named, GRosirENo tt and are no other than one little man, about five feet two or three inches 'high, and Who had, previous to that time, been confitted near seven week, in Cold Bath:fields • Prison', under a warrant from the Secretary or State for the Home Department. So much for '7 correctness of every fact from sources or respectable authority." By making use .of the terms FRANK, &c &c.,....y0u may succeed i n : gra tifying your employers, but you trust never expect to be successful in depreciating my character in the eyes of a discerning Public; for such mean, low, vulgar attempts, will only draw upon you well merited ridicule and contempt. You affirm that BI RUNG introduced Oliver into a Secret Committee of which I was a Member, and present at that time ; and lest your attempt of ruining my. character should not be complete, you add, "..FRANK WARD, with GRDSVENOR, lIENsON, and lIANES , were all appointed to comraand, end had proceeded to their several stations." I do solemnly declare, and am ready to attest it on oath before any Magistrate, as well as produce witnesses on oath to establish the facts, that I never was a frame•breOter, no belonged to any Committee of Luddites, although you malignantly represent toe as one of the principal of them ; that I am not, tier ever was a Member .of any Political Committee, eilber secret or otherwise ; that I never appointed to ally command, have taken any eetive part, either secretly or openly to forward the cause of Parliamentary Reform ; nor have either directly or indirectly been engaged in any treasonable practices. These assertions an at any time be well 

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001651/18180218/026/0003
Globe - Wednesday 18 February 1818

in debate on people detained under act, Ward et al, Castlereagh etc

https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/sittings/1818/feb/17


Specifically https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1818/feb/17/motion-respecting-the-petitions
...

victed of •luiilar oftences, and was ordered for execution, also made u confession. He disclosed particulars relative to. Ward, which fully corroborated Mitchell’* statement—althoutfh he had no communication with that culprit. the first purl of his deposition related to (tersons who had not been imprisoned under the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, would not detail it—but confine himself to that portion of it which was illustrative of the character Ward. said S. W, first proposed to me the destruction Heuthcotes’s machinery. S. W, drew a plan of Heathcote’s premises, which I believe whs conveyed Frank Ward, who burned it, wheu the business was done.” —f Hear, hear.J This was the only part winch Ward was mentioned in the deposition made by Savage. But it corroborateii the fact, that he was one of those who were actively employed in the system of destruction. the House had been acquainted with the existence of those depositions, Gentlemen would not have been so ready to give credit to the good character of this individual. Mr. Ward, this moral, this truly religious man, complained that lie hud suffered great hardships. But who would now believe him, after what he had stated ? He had been committed for treasonable practices, on the oath of more than one witness—and it appeared, on the dying declaration of two of his associates, that he had been closely connected with those dreadful, those infernal transactions, which had disgraced Nottingham and some of the neighbouring districts. Those misguided individuals, not following the course of others, who, at the point I death, gave different colour to all they had stated in their more serious moments, confessed their criminality. And, Gentlemen chose to return the subject of the individuals to whom he alluded, he believed he could state circumstances that would tend toalter theiropinions upon that point, as much those had now laid before the House must operate in effecting a change in their feelings with respect to Mr. Ward. There was, in the case had laid before the House, a moral condemnation; it only wanted the verdict of Jury to render it criminal one. He stated this, that Gentlemen might not be run away with by the character of Mr. Ward, who hud been described one of the most moral men that ever existed.— (Hear, hear.) —lf had suffered any grievance, let In* case thrown into such aahape, that it could be submitted to a Court of Justice—but he denied that any ground was laid for bringing it under the consideration of a Committee of that House—ami, if it were not rational to proceed thus, in the case Ward, it was equally irrational, with respect to all the other cases. these grounds he would oppose a motion, founded ex-parte statements, and meant for the benefit and protection of men, rvhose conduct had rendered it necessary that his Majesty's Government should armed with extiaordinary powers. He believed, when the course adopted by Ministers had been examined in the Committee stairs, it would he found unworthy of the blame that was attached to it. That Committee, had no doubt, would find that the statements made against them were unfounded—anil the House, lie was convinced, would participate with them in the propriety of that conclusion. They would perceive that what Ministers had done aro'e not from love oppression, but from desire relieve tlie country from the evils which threatened it. The Noble Lord had not, in bringing forward Iris motion, attempted to clothe the proceeding with that character of secresy which ought to belong to it. called for an open Committee, and seemed to think that his Majesty’s Ministers could bring before that Committee those persons who had given evidence, the express condition, that their names should concealed. It was impossible that they could that. He would again state, with confidence, that no person had been committed, except on oath, and with the advice of the Law Officers of the Crown. Now was there single instance in which Ministers could not bring home to the parly accused a strong probability crime? If, by agreeing this motion, they took from the Government the opportunity procuring private information, in times great danger, they would Hod that the consequence* would most dangerous—for, under such circumstances, the conspirator himself would scarcely venture to come forward, and place his life in jeopardy. When the House considered the smalt number of persons arrested under the Suspension Bill, and the scenes that took place in the disturbed parts of the country, they would, he was sure, come to the conclusion, that Ministers hud not acted improperly—- but that they had only endeavoured to put down a great danger, which, but for their exertions, would have given Gentlemen such proof of its existence, ought always to be avoided. On these grounds would give his must direct negative to the case. Mr. J. Smith said, he understood the object the Noble Lord’s motion was merely refer to Committee the Petition of Francis Wardand came down with the full intention opposing that motion.—//feur, hear.) —Because, lie believed, when (hat man’s case was fully known, individual could believe a word contained in Ins Petition. The Hon. Member then adverted certain falsehoods contained in the Petition, and proceeded to state, that had received information, which he could fully depend on, that Francis Ward was one those who plotted and perfected the horrible outrage that took place at Loughborough. One circumstance wished to state, which the Noble Lord opposite bad omitted, luirncly, that previous to Mitchell’s trial, he had disclosed to the solicitor whom lie was defended, the part he had taken in various disturbances—which communication, after his execution, the solicitor made known to the proper authority.— Hear, heur, hear,J This disclosure agreed, in substance, with what the Noble Lord had staled.— fHear.J —The Hon. Gentleman then paid high compliment Lord Sidmouth, for hi* humanity—but suggested, that though In* Lordship would not authorise severity to used towards any prisoner, some of those who acted under him, alluded to the keepers of prisons, might not influenced by the same good Now, any improper severity could proved to hove taken place under the Suspension ii:ll, tire House ought to inquire into it. could not, therefore, oppose the motion, embracing, it did. the several persons whose chapicteis were not st- ted similar to that of Ward, With respect that great criminal, regretted that lie hud not been 

...

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000950/18190126/026/0004
Cumberland Pacquet, and Ware's Whitehaven Advertiser - Tuesday 26 January 1819

TO DO

LAW INTELLIGENCE. Court of King’s Bench, Jan. 16.—(Ward v. Clement.) —This was an action for a libel, brought against the proprietor the Observer Newspaper. The libel complained appeared November, 1817, in the Monday impression of that paper, and was as follows : Derbyshire Insurrection.—-Wt shall proceed fogitc our Reuters a more authentic, well as more minute account of the rise and progress of the insurrection, connected it was with almost all the manufacturing towns in the kingdom, than has hitherto been published; from whence the public will enabled to form a correct estimate of the real character of the danger which the country was threatened, and the absolute necessity which was imposed upon the Minister of the flomc Department to determine upon the appointment of the Commission Derby. The sources of our authority. though extended over considerable part of the distuibed counties, are highly respectable, and can pledge ourselves for the correctness of every fuel which wc shall state. The 27th of May, Birkin accompanied Oliver Nottingham, and introduced him the secret committee. assembled there—among whom were Haynes, Holmes. Grosvenor, Henson, and Frank Ward.” Again—lt is a singular fact, and may hcrebe stated, that the execution of the Luddites* who were tried the Spring Assises, these unhappy men confestied that plan had he' n formed for insurrection and re liellion, ami that Old Ned (meaning Ned I.uddJ was to command. Some of the most desperate of these had been pointed out storm the barracks, and to perform other dangerous duties. Frank Ward, Grosvenor, Henson, and ILynes, wc-e all appointed to command, and had proceeded to their several stations.” The damages were laid at 5,0001. Mr. Chnty opened the pleadings. After a very long trial, the Chief Justice charged the Jury, who retired for about half an hour, and returned a verdict for the plaintiff—Damages 6001. 



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002376/18190124/023/0004
British Luminary - Sunday 24 January 1819

TO DO

DOMESTIC POLITICS. TRIUMPH OF FRANK WARD OVER LORD CASTLEREAGH: The recompense which his great, State Persecutors withheld, and the justice which they refused, and were indeln" niqed for having violated, have at length been rendered to t° injured FRANCis,NITAito, by an honest English Jury. The proceedings in this ease of WAEP V. CLEMENT, the pr m. prietor of the Observer, which was tried on the 16th inst. 0. Ahe Court of King's Bench, will now be read with lively jll terest ; and the verdict affords fresh grounds of exithation .the friends of humanity, and fresh evidence of the prevailing spirit of justice and independence in the breasts of our env lighteued. and . impartial fellow-countrymen, whenever 03 *appeal is made to their decision from the attacks Of cahlW ill o that works 1.11 darkness, or the assaults of arbitrary powers t ° bold to be disguised. When FRANK WARD was cast into prison, sustaining tb a e , oppressions of the iron hand of power, in a state of ruin, aP t without trial or redress," . the Observer became the instrilule:_ls. of his utter destruction, by publishing the greatest caluinnliu.. against hiui'; and Lord, CAsmtacAon, felt hipsell embolueenek from, his privilege, to go greater lengths in the of Commons than the proprietor of the Observer thirst atteto.t.eP, in his columns. According to his Lordship, WARD ‘v 9 - 3 1/ 0 rally a man . covered over with crimes. No character co _ e be more .infamous than his was represented to be . . Hi s Was cOnsidered sufficient to drowa all opposition to the mands of Ministers. Statg Reader, attend ! WARD is liberated from a Prison, without a single 'charge against him. He, IR tu. ,11 becomes a Plaintiff: he demands a Trial. He chaileng es , inquiry into his character conduct; and though , been oelected. by Lord CAME,II.U.';:q ) 4, th t Yqi tri 

a 11S could find for enormity of guilt, yet when he t a P fr Peared in open Court, and a fair opportunity of proof was off ° l ll ed and called lot, not the least shadow of evidence was th e '0 support of any of these heinous allegations on tva e of his Majesty's Ministers, and not the least attempt ; 1 \ ;- by Mr. CLEMENT in the canse,to justify the Libel I fail to advert ~ to a circumstance wh'ch transit': In the course of the evidence, and which is well deservr. Many of the Papers on which the, libel was P lined,l appears, were ‘vithout stamps, and on that account tatl l „ , . distributed by. t he AGENTS of GOVERNMENT. 1111 S show-. th e favour with ‘vhich Papers that ADVOCATE the cause or Government are regarded by those who are in P°Ssessio ll of the channels of trantnission, and who have other exemptions to 'grant, and privileges to bestow. To whose account the expense of circulating these - bundles of 13 4111 muy was placed, we may 'well conjecture This is as , la ck a transaction as we have seen on record for a long time, Itli d We are truly sorry that the Press of &country, calling it.isftlf free, shout,: ever be made the willing instrument of and injustice.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002577/18190118/017/0003
London Packet and New Lloyd's Evening Post - Monday 18 January 1819

LAW INTELLI9ENCE. COURT OF KING'S BENCH, JANUARY 16. r. CLEMENT. This was an action for a libel. Lid at 5000/. The damages were ,Mr. Scarlett stated the else to the Jury. The liresent way a ease of no common interest in a politic4l point of view. The plaintiff had raised himself from a lower situation to that of 6. master lace-manufacturer at Nottingham. He took part with the journeymen who stood out for the increase of wages, and gave them that increase himself. When the, disturbances broke out .in that part of the country, Ward. 'became the Treasurer; and when the Habeas Corpus was suspended in June, 1817, he was taken from his family by 10 or -12 Constables, and, after ineffectual applications to the Magistrates at Nottingham, he was 'conveyed to Cold Bath-fields prison, and from thence to Oxford, where he remained till the 13th of November following, when he was released. But when he arrived at Nottingham, he discovered, to his astonishment, that the Editor of a Newspaper, called The Observer, had sent into the world, on the 10th of Novembei., 1817, a Paper, published different to the usual. form, partly blank and without a stamp, differing materially from the Paper of the preceding day (Sunday), the 9th of . November, of which it purported to be a second edition,. In this Paper, under the head of "Derbyshi re Insurrection, and Execution of the Convicted," a full detail of all the circumstances connected with those unfortnnate proceedings is professed to be given; in the course of which Ward, the plaintiff,lvho knew nothing of politics or of Oliver, except what he might casually gain from reading a Newspaper, is accused of "being one of the individuals who formed the Secret Committee at Nottingham, to whom 'Oliver was introduced; and by whom he was informed' that all was ready; and further, that some of the Luddites who were convicted and executed at Leicester, just previous to their exe r . eution, declared, that the plaintiff', FrankMard, was one of the old Ned Ludds.who were appointed to command the rebel forces; that he had proceeded to his appointed post, from whence he was, with others, to march, for the purpose of storming the barracks, at an appointed time." This was the libel.. Ann Ward, daughter of the plaintiff, deposed, that her father lived at Nottingham, and was known by the name of Frank Ward. He was a lace-manufacturer; employed 10 or 11 hands, and conducted his own busines's. Recollected the Constables coming to her father's house on the 15th of June, 1817; they searched the house, and, having, done so, left it before her father did; he afterwards went out; this was about four p'elock in the afternoon of Tuesday; after he went out he did not return, and on the Saturday morning after witness saw him in custody. He returned home soon after the 13th of November, 1817. J. Holmes knew Oliver; was confined in Cold Bath‘flelds in the month of June; was taken up at Nottingham. Ward was in custody at the same time, so was Haines; they were brought up to Cold Bath-fields at the same time. Mr. Goodyer, the publisher of The Observer, stated ) the number of Papers sold on Sunday, the 9th of No- 
tt was possune for mm to say la* many were pulled 'without stamps and given away. Mr. C, himself packed them. up and sent - them away. Witness was not present when sent them away; does not know that Mr. Clement sent them by hundreds. to the different Post-masters and prisons in the country; - but knows that it was ansfomary With Mr. U;cnient to give away a number of blank papers Whenever any thing occurred to excite public interest. Nelson, a letter-carrier at Derby, recollected receiving a large quantity of Observers one day in November 1817, from Mrs. Eaton, the gaoler's wife, to distribute About the town gratis. • Mr. Gurney, on the part of the defendant; addressed the Jury, and contended that Mr. Ward Might to have tried this cause in his own neighbourhood, if he lt that his character . had ,sufFered any thing by what Air. Clement had inserted in his paper, which could not have been maliciously done, as it arose from an account ha had received of the disturbed counties. The Chief Justice summed up, and went through a review ofthelibcl, which he said contained circumstances Ot' 'grave charge against the plaintiff; and the defendant having' been proved the publisher, the plaintiff wa's intitled ,to a verdict; the question of damages, was one peculiarly for the consideration of the Jury; he would on this occasion, as he did on all others, recommend. them to consider that question dispassionately, and to be guided in the sum they awarded by Moderation, blended with justice, a course which he had no doubt they would pursue on the present occasion. . The 'Jury retired for near half an hour, when they returned, and by the mouth of Mr: Kirby,- th'eir Fore- the late Sheriff of London, delivered a verdict for the plaintiff—Damages 600/. costs 40s. it, 

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18190118/007/0003
Morning Chronicle - Monday 18 January 1819

etc


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000540/18190128/011/0003
The Scotsman - Thursday 28 January 1819


TO DO

COURT OF KING'S BENCH

Saturday, Jan. 16.

LIBEL.— WARD V. CLEMENT.

 Thh was an _actfon for a _LilicL The _damages were laid at L . 5 , 000 . Mr SCARI _. ETT _stited the _case to the Jury . _The _present-was a _case of aci _common interest in . a political point of view . The plaintiffhad _raised hinisciffrom a _lower situation to that of a _master _lace-manufacturer at Nottingham . _He took _part with the journeymen who stood out for the _increase of w _. _igcs , _and gave _them that increase himself . When the disturlmncci _broke out in _that part of the country _. Ward _became the _treasurer ; and when the _Habeas _Corpus was _suspended in _June 1817 , he _was taken from hi _» family by _ten or twelve _constables , and , after ineffectual _applications to the Magistrate _.. at Nottingham , _he _was conveyed to Coldbatd-fieMs prison , _and from thence to Oxford , _-where be remained till the 13 th of _November following , when he was _released . But _when he arrived at _Nottinfiham , he discovered , to his astonishment , that the Editor of a _Newspaper , _called " _The _Observer , " had sent into the world , on _the 10 th of November 1817 , a paper _published _different to the usual forin , partly blank , and without a _stamp , _differing materially from the paper of _the preceding day , ( Sunday , ) the 9 th of November , of _which it is _purported to be a second edition . In _this paper , _under the head of " _Derbyshire Insurrection , and Execution of the Convicted , " a _full detail of all the _circumstances connected with _. those unfortunate _proceedings _is _professed to be _given , in the course of which _. Ward , the pl : iintiir , who knew nothing of _politic _* or of Oliver , _except what _he mig ht _casually gain from _reading a newspaper , is accused of " being one of the _individuals who _formed the secret _committee at Nottingham , to whom Oliver was _introduced , and by _whom he was _informed that all was ready ; and farther , tliat some _of ' the Ludtlites who were couvicted and _executed at _Leicester , just previous to their c _: _iecution , _declared that the plaintiff , _Frank Ward , was one of the old Ned Ludds who were _appointed _to command the rebel forces ; that he had proceeded to his appointed post , from whence he was , witli others , to march fur _the purpose of _storming the _barracks at an _appointed time . " _Tliii was the libel . - " . Ann Ward , daughter of the pTaintiff , deposed , that her father lived in Nottingham , and _was known by the name of Frank Ward . - He was a lace-manufacturer ; _employed ten or _eleven hands _, and conducted his own business ; recollected the constables _coming to her father ' s house on _die iSth June 1817 ; they searched _the _house , and having 'lone so , left the house before _her father did ; he _afterwards went oat ; this _was _about four o ' _clock in tlie _afternoon of _the _Tuesday ; _after _he went _out he did not _return , and on tlie S . iturday _morning _after _witness saw him in _custoJy _; he _retui-ntid _house _300 .. _utter _the l . 5 th of November 1817 . J . Hiilmes knew _Oliver ; was _confined in _Coldhatli-fie'd . i in _thenwnthofJune ; was _t-ikcn up at _Nottinglia-. n ; Ward _was in ciistodv _at ; h 3 _s'iiii ( _: ti"ie , i < i-wasHaines ; they _were _broug ' nt up to _Coldbath-fieLls at the siimi : time . Mr _Mallinson , from _. the _i-ita'np office , produced copies of The _Observer newspaper , of the d 4 tes of Nov . 9 th and Nov . 10 th , _1817 . Mr Burke , also _from the Stamp-office , _produced the affidavit of the _defeuditiit , stating _himself to be sole proprietor uf _The _Observer newspaper . Mr Goodver , _the publisher of The _Observer , stated , that on Sunday , _November 9 lh , there were 10 , _850 of the _Pi ' . per sol . i . _On Monday the ! 0 th , 2 , 000 were published with stamps . It was _impossible for hini to say how many _were pulled without stamps and _^ iven away ; thinks it _impossible there shoulJ be so many as 20 , 000 given away _; could not bay tlnire _was not 10 , 000 , but _thinks _there was _net ; Mr _Clement _himself _packed them up and _sent them away ; witness _was not present when lie _sent them away ; does not know thut Mr Clement _sent them by _hundreds to the _different _postmasters _and prisons in the country , but knows that it was customary with Mr _Clement to give away a _number of blank papers _whenever _any thing occurred to _c _.-icitc public interest . _Cross-examined—Tin _; Monday _Paper was a new paper . On the 10 th _November tlicrc was _an _account of _the death ot the Princess Charlotte ; that _article was tliat which most excited public curiosity . _The unstamped papers _contained no _advertisements . - _Nelson , a _letter-carrier at Derby , recollected receiving _;» _large quantity of _Observers one _diiy in _November 1 . S 17 , froiii Mrs Eaton , the _gaoler ' s wife , to distribute about the town gratis . _The' _libel was then _read . _Mr Gurncy , on the part of the defendant , _addressed the Jury , and contended ' that Mr _Ward ought to h ; ivc _tried this cause in his own nei _ghbourhood , it' he felt tliat his character had _suffered by any _thing Mr _Clement h _;> d _inserted in his paper , which could not have been _maliciously done , as it _arose from an account _he had _received of the _disturbed _counties . The Chief-Justice summed up , and _observed , that many topics had been noted on this _occasion , which had nothina _; to do with the _question the Jury iiad at _present to _consfdcr ; which was , _whether the delcndant was the _publisher of _the _alleged libel , and if so , wh . it _injury _the phiintiB' had _sustained by the publication . _The _Learned _Judge _then went through a review of the libel , which he said _contained circumstances of prave charge _against the _plaintiff ; and _the _defendant _having _been _proved the publisher , tlie plaintiff _' was _entitled to a verdict ; tlie question _of damages was one peculiarly for the considcrutiun tif the Jury . He _would on this oicusion , as he did on all _others , recommend them to _consider that question _dispassionately , and to be guided _in the sum they _awarded by moderation , blended with _justice , a _course which he had no doubt they _would pursue on tlie _present _occasion . I he Jury _retired for _near _half an liour , _when _they returned , _and liv the mouth of Mr Kirby , _their foreman , the Inte _Sheriff of _London , _delivered _^ a _verdict for the pUuntin _;—Damages L . 6 _iX _) , costs _• 30 s 