# Frank Ward Libel


## Ward Libel

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000365/18171129/016/0004
Carlisle Patriot - Saturday 29 November 1817

HISTORY OF THE DERBYSHIRE INSURRECTION.

[From the Observer Newspaper.]

We shall proceed to our readers a more authentic, well as a more minute account of the riot and progress of the insurrection, connected as it was with almost all the manufacturing towns in the kingdom, than has hitherto been published: from whence the public will be enabled form a just estimate of the real character of the danger by which the country was threatened, and the absolute necessity which was imposed upon the ministers of the home department to determine upon the appointment of the commissions at Derby. The sources of our authority, although extended over a considerable part of the disturbed counties, are highly respectable, and we can pledge ourselves for the correctness of every fact which we shall state.

It appears that ever since the early part of the French Revolution, and subsequent to the suppression of the Corresponding societies, there existed throughout this kingdom number of disaffected characters, who. although few when compared with the great mass of the people, yet found ways to propagate their mischievous doctrines by a variety of means—by the circulation seditious publications, and the use inflammatory language wherever opportunity safely offered, excite a contempt for the government, and to induce an opinion of the necessity of a change of things;—or to speak in more intelligible language—of a revolution! To the sentiments of these men there were many converts, and the history of our own times furnishes us with some important attempts to form something like a systematic plan for furthering this nefarious object; among which, the case of Colonel Despard and his associates must yet be fresh in the recollection of our readers. The vigilance of the ministry, however, aided by the activity the police, fortunately prevented the formation of any thing like a formidable confederacy, and thus for a time the plots of the conspirators were frustrated.

Although suppressed for the time, the demon of discord still lurked in secret, and at the earliest opportunity new efforts were made to prepare the minds of the people for some great change; every event which could by fair reasoning, or otherwise, draw the government into disrepute, was seized with avidity by the partizans of treason, and applied by them to further their ultimate views. Resolutions were passed, and works published, all tending to the same end, and in fact, indirectly although not openly, pointing out to the nation at large the necessity of its relieving itself from the coercion of its existing rulers. Thus matters went gradually forward till 1812: societies were formed in various of parts the country of those persons who had imbibed the revolutionary principles which had been so industriously disseminated, and who were disposed to quarrel with every ordinance which trenched upon what they were pleased to call their natural rights.

At this period the dispute arose between the master hosiers and frame-work knitters at Nottingham, which gave rise to the association of persons called Luddites. The outrages commuted by these miscreants need no repetition; they are still engraven on the recollection of every feeling mind. The Luddites, it will be recollected, were formed into divisions, and were extremely numerous. The great leaders were, however, stationed in the town of Nottingham, and were divided into two bodies, called a committee of council, or advice, and an executive committee. The former consisted of men of education and experience, who took upon themselves to deliberate upon what acts of atrocity it were fit should be done; and the latter, who were desperate characters, distinguished for firmness of nerve and daring boldness, were the persons appointed to perform any work which the former might direct, however wicked; and it well known that the work of death was to them a familiar and a willing task. From 1812 to 1816 these ruffians continued their secret pursuits without receiving an effectual check, and gaining confidence in proportion to their success, became more determined in their enterprizes till the reception which they received at Loughborough, (where, in the daring attack upon a factory, 14 were taken, and were subsequently tried and executed at Leicester), gave them a check. Previous to this latter event, politics were introduced among the Luddites; who, although in the first instance, associated only for the purposes of revenge, connected with their own immediate trades, now rendered their compact more important by directing their views to a wider field, namely, the overthrow of the government; a plan which received the grateful encouragement from the supposed invincibility of their numbers, and the secrecy of their machinations. Correspondences were opened with some of the disaffected societies in London, Manchester, Sheffield, Wakefield, Birmingham, and elsewhere; and where business could not be done by means of letters, deputies were sent, with full powers to coalesce, and to advise upon general grounds. The return Of these deimties to Nottingham gave the most flattering hopes to the Luddites, for they found that a feeling of discontent was very widely prevalent among the manufacturing and labouring population of the kingdom, which wanted but a little encouragement to be rendered subservient to the great end— Revolution.

The distresses which were encountered at this season by the poorer classes, from various cames— want of employment, scarcity of provisions, &c. were seized upon the partizans of sedition as circumstances pregnant with the most important consequences to their views. The minds of the people became naturally soured and discontented, and in fact they were willing to ascribe their sufferings to any cause which a specious mind might suggest. Thus it was, then, that they swallowed with avidity the publications of that day, which told them that all their miseries were attributable to the want of parliamentary reform; and they had no hesitation in adopting the system of forming themselves into Hampden Clubs, for the purpose of petitioning parliament for a redress of their grievances, as recommended by Major Cartwright. We by no means desire it to believed, however, that it is our opinion that the worthy Major was aware of the net in which he was himself inclosed, or that he coincided in the real objects of those whom his plans were strenuously recommended.

Hampden Clubs were now formed in almost every village throughout the kingdom, and their numbers clearly ascertained. The meetings and the declarations of the Hampden Club at the Freemasons' Tavern, in London, were regularly noticed, and the parties assembled there were held out to the village clubs as co-operating in the general plans—a very powerful incitement, it must admitted, to ignorant minds,—and ably applied by those who felt and were desirous of increasing its importance. In fact, Sir Francis Burdett and Major Cartwirght were regarded as the leaders of all the minor associations. Thus matters went on through the autumn of 1816. Nothing particular was done except petitions and enlarging the clubs. In November, 1816, printed resolutions were circulated throughout the counties of Oerby, Nottingham, Leicestershire, Yorkshire, and, in fact, through all the club districts, of a most inflammatory description; and it began to be openly announced, and particularly by the Leicestershire party, that nothing less than the total overthrow of the government would satisfy the people. Declarations were made to this effect at the Heames Hampden Club, by Robt. Bestwick and J. McKeswick (now a convict), the president and secretary, early in December. The same spirit soon spread to the other Hampden Clubs, and it was openly asserted that no good could be done without a change of King and Government. The subject was first discussed at the Nag's Head, at Heames but was afterwards more fully entered upon at the meeting houses at Ripley, Wingfield, and at all the surrounding villages. Delegates were sent to Manchester and Leeds, to learn how it was determined to act there, and it was then ascertained that it had been resolved to send up their petitions to London by delegates, and not by post, or through the members for their respective districts, as at first intended.

TO DO William Smith, Ripley, who has absconded, and Thomas Bacon (a convict), now openly declared theni- converts to opinion, that the Hampden Clubs were of use—that their petitions would not heard—and that if they expected any thing to be done, the people must be organized and armed. The Hampden Club principles, they said did not strike at the root of the evil. A delegate from Manchester, named Benbow, now arrived Pentridgc, and having persuaded the club to draw up a petition, induced Bacon to agree to take it up to London, and attend the meeting of delegates there. Bacon accordingly went up to London about the middle of January, and was at the delegate meeting. And here it may not be improper to mention, that this very man, Bacon, was forced to fly the country about years back, when the militia bill first passed, in consequence of his being detected in distributing seditious papers among the people, inciting them oppose the execution of the act. On Bacon's arrival in London, and introduction to other delegates, he was extremely well received: it was agreed among themselves that it was not very likely their petitions would be attended to, and in fact many of them were prepared in printed form, purposely that they might rejected. The public meetings which were held these men were found not answer their object altogether, and private meetings were upon. For this purpose a private room was taken, where a select few met, and here it was resolved that on their return to their several clubs they should point out the inefficacy of petition, and the absolute necessity of preparing aimed force; in fact, it was resolved that "physical strength" should be resorted without delay. Tom Bacon, who was present secret deliberations, his return to Pentridge, all these things to his confidential friends, and produced drawings of pikes and other implements □destruction, which had been approved in London, from the facility with which they could manufactured. A new course of proceeding now commenced, me stings were held arrange the mode of rising, and to prepare Barms and ammunition. The Nottingham men, Luddites, became more active than ever, and it was partially resolved by them to rise of themselves, without any regard to the Londoners, who had become more cautious from their failure on the 2nd December. The executive committee of the Luddites now became important body. have already described them as men capable any act however daring, and from them it was resolved to select leaders to bring forward the forces from the neighbouring counties Nottingham, which was to be the seat of the new government; and lirandirt/i, who was one of the executive committee, was appointed to take the command of the Pentridge, Wingfield, and division. At the private meetings at which Tom Bacon presided, he declared that he was quite determined the insurrection should take place on the Monday after Sir Francis Burdett's motion respecting parliamentary reform, land he exhorted his partizans to make every effort for day. Beside the private meetings, general meetings were held, to which the minor meetings made their reports. The first of these general committees embraced Nottingham, Leicester, and Derby, which Tom Bacon was a member. The second took in Birmingham, Wolverhampton, and all the population that district; the third, Leeds; the fourth, Manchester; the fifth, Huddersfield; and throughout all the manufacturing counties. From mihcae general meetings delegates were appointed, ■ form a central committee of execution, which assembled at the Joiners' Arms, Wakefield; and thus an uninterrupted and intelligible communication was kept lap with the conspirators in all directions, and unity of design secured. During February and March, the central meeting delegates continued their deliberations. Reports were to them from their respective districts of the numbers ready to rise; the pike heads manufactured; arms procured; the depots established; the stores collected; the barracks open to assault inspected; the of military under arms ascertained; and all those necessary details by which a judgment of the probability of success might be formed. At central meeting held in the middle of March, an order was made, that the delegates should assemble again the sth of May, and report what was the number of staunch friends who were ready at all risks lise—and what were their positive means of action. It was also determined that Mitchell should be sent to London to ascertain what number of men might depended upon there, and who would come forward in case the insurrectional experiment was made in the country. Mitchell accordingly set off for London, and found his way to Pendrill, the boot-maker, in Newgate-street, who it will recollected was one the speakers in Spa-fields, and who it has since been discovered harboured Young Watson until his escape board the Venus. Pendrill was in state of despair, and was preparing leave England—and now for the first time does the name of Oliver become any way connected with these transactions. Mitchell found Oliver with Pendrill assisting him in making up his books. Oliver had been in the secret of the London conspiracy, and was aware why Pendrill was about to fly. There was no reserve with him, as was thought to one of the party, and Mitchell opened the object his mission; asking at the same time, what force it was thought London might produce ? said thought the same number that had assembled Spa-fields, namely, 70,000. If the rising took place the country, doubt the same number would rise again in London. Mitchell remained in town some time, and he says himself, had interviews with Sir Francis Burdett, Major Cartwright, and Mr. Hunt, the state the country, and was of opinion, that there was every hope success. Mitchell and Oliver mutually endeavoured to persuade not to go to America, but to and see what would the result the rising. however, said his mind was made up: thought the government too strong but the same time he said if Mitchell would take Oliver with him through the country, and meet him at Liverpool—if Oliver then made a favourable report of appearances, might be induced to stop. This was agreed upon. Pendrill went on with the winding up his affairs, and Mitchell continued for some time consulting with some of the London party. W« come now that period when Oliver first introduced himself Lord Sidmouth. Oliver, it appears agreeing with his friend Pendrill the improbability of attending any further efforts the part the disaffected, from feelings which will not examine, determined to wait upon Lord With this view accordingly prepared letter stating / •' ' the nature the information had to give, and the services which he might yet have it in his power to perform. This letter took himself to the Home Office, and it was delivered to Lord His Lordship, from information already in his possession, knew that the contents of the letter were part correct, and therefore had hesitation in accepting Oliver's services. The latter was accordingly introduced his Lordship, and in the course of subsequent interview's a plan of proceedings was determined upon, with view to frustrate the intended insurrections. The first introduction of Oliver took place towards the latter end of March, and the 25th of April Oliver and Mitchell, (the latter not suspecting the views of his associate) quitted London together the mail. They passed through Birmingham Derby, where they remained not more than ten minutes; but during this time Mitchell introduced Oliver to Mr. Robertshaw, at the Talbot Inn, his particular friend. This was the of April, and the whole matter occurred while the horses of the mail were changing. They went on that night Sheffield, and the next day Wakefield, Dewsbury, and different places, Mitchell introducing Oliver as a delegate from London. This was the case at a meeting held at Scholes's, the Joiners' Arms at Wakefield. In his way Oliver was carried about different meetings, till the sth of May. On this day the central meeting took place, in pursuance of adjournment, at the Joiners' Arms, Wakefield, when the different delegates attended, and made their returns of the physical strength of their respective districts, disposed to run all risks. Birmingham district was represented to be able to furnish a force of 150,000 men, Sheffield 10,000. Tom Bacon gave in as the forces of Derby, Nottingham, and Leicester; and 30,000 more, if wanted. Mitchell reported London as having a force of 70,000, and so on each delegate reported the effective numbers of the disaffected in his division. Whether Oliver was at this meeting not, is not certain; but he soon after quitted Wakefield, and went to Liverpool see Pendrill, to whom he reported his observations. Pendrill said was satisfied that all was going well; but he not sufficiently satisfied remain see the issue of the struggle, and therefore chose to set sail for America. Mitchell was now taken into custody, and Oliver returned to London, making his way through Bradford, Leeds, and Nottingham. On his arrival at Nottingham, which place (he had been told at Wakefield) Tom Bacon was the representative at the central meeting there, went out enquire for him while the coach passengers were dining, but no such person was known in the town; Bacon being, fact, a resident at Pentridge, and Oliver being entirely ignorant of who really was: a circumstance which falsifies the intimacy said to subsist between Oliver and Bacon. Oliver left London again the 23rd May, and being now without his former companion, Mitchell, could only pursue the track through which Mitchell had taken him. knew nobody except through Mitchell's introduction. his arrival at Birmingham, found tilings going as had been stated the central meeting. The delegates being completely conjoined, the 25th May, Sunday, he reached Derby, and went to Robertshaw's. He was too late for the family dinner, and was shewn into a private room; whilst there, Robertshaw came in, and accosting him, ?? said, his face was familiar to him upon which, Oliver reminded him of his having been introduced him some time before by Mitchell. Some conversation then took place Mitchell's fate, and other topics; and Oliver having expressed a wish be introduced Nottingham, sent for two or three persons with that vie\v, one of whom, -Mr. Birkin (now custody), came, and a good deal conversation passed. Oliver was afterwards introduced into the public room Robertshaw's, see what sort of people were there; he, however, confined himself to reading the paper there, and did not appear to have any knowledge of Birkin, who sat opposite him, and who, it was agreed, should appear not to have seen before. The next day, the of May, Birkin accompanied Oliver to Nottingham, and introduced him to the secret committee assembled there, among whom were Haynes, Holmes, Grosvenor, Heuson, and Frank Ward. At this time Oliver did not know a human being Nottingham, and only got to the committee through the medium of Birkin, after undergoing strict examination two different flours before reached the third, which the conspirators occupied. was introduced by Birkin old friend, and was informed by the committee that they were heady. this, as former occasions, Oliver's first act was to go the magistrates, and inform them of the objects he had in view and these afterwards communicated the result of his enquiries. Tuesday he set off again for Yorkshire, and reported to the Sheffield magistrates what had heard, in the same manner had done Birmingham and Nottingham. From Sheffield he went to Halifax, Manchester, and Liverpool, and returning through Manchester, proceeded to Leeds. In all those towns had communications both with the insurgents and the magistrates; ascertaining from the one the extent of their arrangements, and preparing the others for the worst that might happen. was the he reached Leeds, and was taken Thornhill Lees by Sir John Byng's cavalry, is already well known. got from them, and went to the Joiners' Arms, where he saw Scholes, who accompanied him to the Leeds mail. By this time the Wakefield party began suspect him to be spy, and they were once confirmed in their suspicions by Major servant coming up and delivering him letter while sitting in the mail. They instantly flew back, and, may naturally supposed, great pains were taken turn the tables, and exclaim it was this government spy that had originated all the plots and conspiracies. Upon this, however, the evidence now clear as to leave no doubt the mind of every rational man. The truth was, that was employed solely to obtain all the information could; and so far was he from urging the rising, that the parties in custody accuse him of proposing delay, as the fact was, and thereby frustrating their object. Saturday night, the 7th of June, reached Nottingham, and finding his friend Birkin, was introduced to the committee: to them he related the particulars of his escape; but having previously put off the rising from the night after Sir Francis Burdett's motion to the June (which induced the Nottingham party, conceiving they were strong enough for their own business, to determine rise the night the Oth) suspicions were entertained that was spy. Haynes particularly urged this, and it was resolved, that should assassinated; but he got away that night, and was in London next day. Thus have conducted Oliver through all his meanderings, and at least shewn, that although acquainted with the plan of the Derbyshire insurrection, be was in respect concerned its formation the whole system having been matured before Mitchell's arrival at Pendrill's shop in London, where Oliver was first introduced him. The alarm soon started in the North: the central meeting being broken up, all were a loss how to act. The system of co-operation was broken, and thus that compact which might have laid prostrate England's happiest hopes, was completely broken up. We have already stated the fact of the Nottingham committee being dissatisfied with the delay proposed by Oliver, the part of the London insurgents, and of their having come to a determination, at all events, to call faith their forces the l>th of June. pursuance of this resolution, Brandreth, the Nottingham captain, was selected fit man to conduct the men of and the adjoining parishes to Nottingham. His firmness had been tried, and his courage unquestioned, on some trying occasions: he was accordingly furnished with a map of the county of Derby, and the different poets which was assemble his forces pointed out. He then received his final orders to be with his men, armed in the best way could, Nottingham Forest, at two o'clock the morning of the 10th. He set out in company with Tom Bacon, and never afterwards returned to Nottingham. This was on the of June, and from that day till the 8th, he was actively engaged paying visits Swanwick, Belper, Alfreton, and other villages in the neighbourhood, ascertaining the number of the insurgents, and giving directions where they were to assemble the 9th. slept two nights the White Horse, kept by Mrs. Weightman, Bacon's sister, and a third night at a friend's house at Heage. j the as was stated on the trial, he was the whole day at the White Horse; and the next night, those disgraceful scenes, which were stated the trial, took place. It does not appear, that in any one instance, Brandreth ever saw Oliver, even heard that such a person was in existence, until he was sent to prison.

DONE BELOW

It is a singular fact, and may be here stated, that at the execution of the Luddites at Leicester, who were tried at the Spring Assizes, these unhappy men confessed, that a plan had been formed for insurrection and rebellion, and that the Old Neds (meaning Ned Ludds) were to command. Some of the most desperate of these had been pointed out to storm the barracks, and perform other dangerous duties. Frank Ward, Grosvenor, Henson, and Haynes, were all appointed to command, and had proceeded to their several stations. The insurgent force, drawn out in Nottingham Forest, far exceeded any thing that appeared in evidence. There was not a single mode of approach to the town on the night of the 9th, which was not guarded, and a watchword used; and large bodies armed were dispersed up and down waiting for the Pentridge and other men, who had been delayed by various causes; but probably most effectually the weather, which was extremely unfavourable. Brandreth is accused of having delayed too long in breaking into houses, and having suffered day to break before he reached Eastwood.

Among the insurgents at Pentridge, Bacon seems to have been the most active and zealous leader. When the seditious meeting act passed, their meetings were held privately at Asherfield's barn and elsewhere; and here Bacon used every argument to ensure confidence; he paid visits to Manchester, Birmingham, and other manufacturing towns, bringing back the most flattering accounts of the preparations in those places.

Three blood horses were ready on the road from Nottingham, to convey the intelligence of success to Birmingham.

In addition to these details we are in possession of a more minute description of the plots and intentions of the Nottingham committee, as well as of the secret meetings held in the neighbourhood of Pentridge and South Wingfield, preparatory to the rising, but our limits preclude us from giving them insertion. In substance they held out a promise of establishing a constitution formed on that of the United Suites of America, at the head of which several distinguished public characters were to be placed, whose names, as they had no connection with the party, it is unnecessary to give. The question respecting the mode of disposing of the Brunswick family was not decided, old Bacon having said it would be time enough to settle the point when they were in their possession. Nottingham was to be the capital, and towards maintaining this post, all the insurgents were to direct their strength. Then Manchester, Birmingham, Leeds, Sheffield, &c. were all to send their forces thither, in order that they might be properly organized. Diversions were to be made in other directions, to distract the attention of ministers, and the soldiers were every where to be encouraged by the most liberal offers to join the people.

The vermin proposed to be killed by the Pentridge conspirators consisted of Colonel Halton, and a numerous lists of respectable magistrates.

We have now brought our historical sketch of these interesting transactions to a close: and from this it evidently appears, that the plans and arrangements for a general insurrection, however made or however farcical, were nevertheless extensive, and well calculated, if not opposed in the manner we have described, to produce well-grounded fears for the peace of society, at least for a time; for we never can believe that success would have long attended the efforts of such a motley multitude. Notwithstanding, even a temporary ascendancy might have produced consequences which the country would ever have had to deplore.


Below also in 

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000172/18180124/008/0001
Leicester Chronicle - Saturday 24 January 1818

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002757/18180125/017/0003
Constitution (London) - Sunday 25 January 1818

TO THE EDITOR OF THE CONSTITUTION

A Letter similar to the following was sent to the Editor of the *Observer* a few weeks ago, requesting him to publish it; but I believe he has never given it publicity. I hope, Sir, you will not refuse me that justice which my accuser has denied, viz. an opportunity of making my own defence. I am, &c.

Nottingham, Jan. 17, 1818  
F, WARD


TO DO

TO THE EDITOR OF THE OBSERVER. Sir,—In your Paper of the 18th of November, you affect to give your Readers a detailed account of the origin and progress of the Derbyshire Insurrection, which took place on the 9th of June, and in your Preface on that subject, you observe, "The sources of our authority, although extended over a considerable part of the disturbed counties, are highly respectable, and we can pledge ourselves for the correctness of every fact which we shall state." There is no doubt, Sir, but your agents are respectable, and their statement correct.—However, I hope you will forgive me if I examine the "correctness" of some of the facts you have there given. You affirm, "at this period (1812) the dispute arose between the Master Hosiers and the Frame-works knitters at Nottingham, which gave rise to the association of persons called Luddites." It is a well-known fact, that the dispute above alluded to, took place more than a year before the period there specified, as several frames were broke in 1811. You further add, "Fourteen Luddites were taken, and were subsequently tried and executed at Leicester." Now, Sir, as there has Essen but seven Luddites executed at that place for frame-breaking since the affair at Loughborough; the other seven malefactors whom you have added may, perhaps, be some of the ails: hireling Journalists, with which this unhappy country so much abounds, who, for their lying and defamation, have met with that reward which they had so long merited. You say, "In November, 1817, printed Resolutions were circulated throughout the counties of Derby, Nottingham, &c. &c. of a most inflammatory description." I need not inform you that this was several months after all, or most of the Hampden Clubs in the try - try were annihilated, the Derbyshire insurrection quelled, and when several of the persons connected with that unhappy transaction had been tried, some executed, and others left under sentence of death.— "The subject (over-turning the Government) first discussed at the Nag's head, at Hermes, but was afterwards more fully entered upon at the Methodist Meeting-houses, for almost all the parties were Methodists, at Ripley, Wingfield, and at all the surrounding villages. "Now, Sir, here is another instance of your ignorance of the subjects of which you are treating. It is evident you know 'willing of those innocent people you are attempting to ea • lumniate. The Methodist attachment to the present Government is obvious to every impartial ot w rver, nay, their loyalty is become proteinial among the Dissenters, and yet you have the audacity to say, the subject of the overthrow of Government was discussed at the Methodist Meeting-houses, for "almost all the parties were Methodists at Wingfield, and at all the surrounding villages." I have no doubt but you wish your Readers to infer that all or most of the persons who were immediately concerned in the Derbyshire Insurrection were Methodists. This is a base attempt to calumniate; I never was nor perhaps newer shall he, a Methodist, s et I but feel for injured innocence. "They (Oliver and MITCHELL) went on that night to Sheffield, the next day to Wakefield, Tewksbury, and different places." No doubt, Sir, but your extensive geographical knowledge scans at first glance the situation not only of Wakefield, but Tewksbury, and the different places alluded to; so that you are well aware the former is a place near Leeds, in Yorkshire, and the latter in the county of Gloucester; although these places may appear rather distant from each other, yet there is no doubt but the means of convenience was adequate to the emergency of the case. From the following sentence, viz., "MITCHELL introduced Oliver as a Delegate from London," it is reasonable to infer, that a considerable potion of their time was occupied in calling on different persons: when this was taken into the account with the distance they had to travel, some persons would be ready to ask how were those Gentlemen conveyed from place to place in so short a space of lime ? Were they taken in a patent balloon, made partly of silk, and covered with Newspapers, edited by hireling Journalists ? for the productions of such persons are generally so much lighter than air, that they would be a necessary acquisition in order to convey swiftly such an enormous load as Oliver, and the weight of guilt which rested upon his head, and anticipated hungry gore-stained hands. You go on to observe, that on "the 27th of May, BIRKIN accompanied Oliver to Nottingham, and introduced him to the Secret Committee assembled there, among whom were llAvatEs, HOLMES,. GROSVENOR, ElEasosr, and FRANK WARD." perhaps are not aware how week and contemptible you make yourself appear by this ridiculous statement.: the two persons whom you have named, GROSVENOR tt and are no other than one little man, about five feet two or three inches high, and who had, previous to that time, been confined near seven week, in Cold Bath-fields Prison, under a warrant from the Secretary or State for the Home Department. So much for '7 correctness of every fact from sources or respectable authority." By making use of the terms FRANK, &c &c.,....you may succeed in gratifying your employers, but you trust never expect to be successful in depreciating my character in the eyes of a discerning Public; for such mean, low, vulgar attempts, will only draw upon you well merited ridicule and contempt. You affirm that BI RUNG introduced Oliver into a Secret Committee of which I was a Member, and present at that time ; and lest your attempt of ruining my. character should not be complete, you add, "..FRANK WARD, with GRDSVENOR, HENSON, and lIANES, were all appointed to comraand, end had proceeded to their several stations." I do solemnly declare, and am ready to attest it on oath before any Magistrate, as well as produce witnesses on oath to establish the facts, that I never was a frame-breaker, no belonged to any Committee of Luddites, although you malignantly represent toe as one of the principal of them; that I am not, tier ever was a Member of any Political Committee, either secret or otherwise; that I never appointed to ally command, have taken any eetive part, either secretly or openly to forward the cause of Parliamentary Reform; nor have either directly or indirectly been engaged in any treasonable practices. These assertions an at any time be well 

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001651/18180218/026/0003
Globe - Wednesday 18 February 1818

in debate on people detained under act, Ward et al, Castlereagh etc

https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/sittings/1818/feb/17


Specifically https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1818/feb/17/motion-respecting-the-petitions
...

TO DO

victed of •luiilar offences, and was ordered for execution, also made a confession. He disclosed particulars relative to Ward, which fully corroborated Mitchell's statement—although he had no communication with that culprit. the first part of his deposition related to persons who had not been imprisoned under the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, would not detail it—but confine himself to that portion of it which was illustrative of the character Ward. said S. W, first proposed to me the destruction Heathcote's machinery. S. W, drew a plan of Heathcote's premises, which I believe whs conveyed Frank Ward, who burned it, when the business was done." —f Hear, hear.J This was the only part winch Ward was mentioned in the deposition made by Savage. But it corroborated the fact, that he was one of those who were actively employed in the system of destruction. the House had been acquainted with the existence of those depositions, Gentlemen would not have been so ready to give credit to the good character of this individual. Mr. Ward, this moral, this truly religious man, complained that he had suffered great hardships. But who would now believe him, after what he had stated? He had been committed for treasonable practices, on the oath of more than one witness—and it appeared, on the dying declaration of two of his associates, that he had been closely connected with those dreadful, those infernal transactions, which had disgraced Nottingham and some of the neighbouring districts. Those misguided individuals, not following the course of others, who, at the point I death, gave different colour to all they had stated in their more serious moments, confessed their criminality. And, Gentlemen chose to return the subject of the individuals to whom he alluded, he believed he could state circumstances that would tend to alter their opinions upon that point, as much those had now laid before the House must operate in effecting a change in their feelings with respect to Mr. Ward. There was, in the case had laid before the House, a moral condemnation; it only wanted the verdict of Jury to render it criminal one. He stated this, that Gentlemen might not be run away with by the character of Mr. Ward, who had been described one of the most moral men that ever existed.— (Hear, hear.) —If had suffered any grievance, let the case thrown into such a shape, that it could be submitted to a Court of Justice—but he denied that any ground was laid for bringing it under the consideration of a Committee of that House—and, if it were not rational to proceed thus, in the case Ward, it was equally irrational, with respect to all the other cases. these grounds he would oppose a motion, founded *ex-parte* statements, and meant for the benefit and protection of men, whose conduct had rendered it necessary that his Majesty's Government should armed with extraordinary powers. He believed, when the course adopted by Ministers had been examined in the Committee stairs, it would he found unworthy of the blame that was attached to it. That Committee, had no doubt, would find that the statements made against them were unfounded—and the House, he was convinced, would participate with them in the propriety of that conclusion. They would perceive that what Ministers had done arose not from love oppression, but from desire relieve the country from the evils which threatened it. The Noble Lord had not, in bringing forward Iris motion, attempted to clothe the proceeding with that character of secresy which ought to belong to it. called for an open Committee, and seemed to think that his Majesty's Ministers could bring before that Committee those persons who had given evidence, the express condition, that their names should concealed. It was impossible that they could that. He would again state, with confidence, that no person had been committed, except on oath, and with the advice of the Law Officers of the Crown. Now was there single instance in which Ministers could not bring home to the parly accused a strong probability crime? If, by agreeing this motion, they took from the Government the opportunity procuring private information, in times great danger, they would Hod that the consequences would most dangerous—for, under such circumstances, the conspirator himself would scarcely venture to come forward, and place his life in jeopardy. When the House considered the smalt number of persons arrested under the Suspension Bill, and the scenes that took place in the disturbed parts of the country, they would, he was sure, come to the conclusion, that Ministers had not acted improperly—- but that they had only endeavoured to put down a great danger, which, but for their exertions, would have given Gentlemen such proof of its existence, ought always to be avoided. On these grounds would give his must direct negative to the case. Mr. J. Smith said, he understood the object the Noble Lord's motion was merely refer to Committee the Petition of Francis Ward and came down with the full intention opposing that motion.—(Hear, hear.) —Because, he believed, when that man's case was fully known, individual could believe a word contained in Ins Petition. The Hon. Member then adverted certain falsehoods contained in the Petition, and proceeded to state, that had received information, which he could fully depend on, that Francis Ward was one those who plotted and perfected the horrible outrage that took place at Loughborough. One circumstance wished to state, which the Noble Lord opposite bad omitted, luirncly, that previous to Mitchell's trial, he had disclosed to the solicitor whom he was defended, the part he had taken in various disturbances—which communication, after his execution, the solicitor made known to the proper authority.— Hear, hear, hear! This disclosure agreed, in substance, with what the Noble Lord had staled.— Hear.J —The Hon. Gentleman then paid high compliment Lord Sidmouth, for his humanity—but suggested, that though his Lordship would not authorise severity to used towards any prisoner, some of those who acted under him, alluded to the keepers of prisons, might not influenced by the same good Now, any improper severity could proved to hove taken place under the Suspension ii:ll, the House ought to inquire into it. could not, therefore, oppose the motion, embracing, it did. the several persons whose chapicteis were not st- ted similar to that of Ward, With respect that great criminal, regretted that he had not been 

...

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000950/18190126/026/0004
Cumberland Pacquet, and Ware's Whitehaven Advertiser - Tuesday 26 January 1819

LAW INTELLIGENCE.

Court of King's Bench, Jan. 16.—(Ward v. Clement.) —This was an action for a libel, brought against the proprietor the *Observer* Newspaper. The libel complained appeared November, 1817, in the Monday impression of that paper, and was as follows:—

"*Derbyshire Insurrection.*—We shall proceed to give our Readers a more authentic, as well as more minute account of the rise and progress of the insurrection, connected it was with almost all the manufacturing towns in the kingdom, than has hitherto been published; from whence the public will enabled to form a correct estimate of the real character of the danger which the country was threatened, and the absolute necessity which was imposed upon the Minister of the Home Department to determine upon the appointment of the Commission at Derby. The sources of our authority, though extended over considerable part of the disturbed counties, are highly respectable, and we can pledge ourselves for the correctness of every fact which we shall state.

"The 27th of May, Birkin accompanied Oliver to Nottingham, and introduced him to the secret committee assembled there—among whom were Haynes, Holmes. Grosvenor, Henson, and Frank Ward."

Again—"It is a singular fact, and may here be stated, that the execution of the *Luddites*, who were tried at the Spring Assizes, these unhappy men that confessed that a plan had been formed for insurrection and rebellion, and that *Old Ned* (meaning *Ned Ludd*) was to command. Some of the most desperate of these had been pointed out to storm the barracks, and to perform other dangerous duties. Frank Ward, Grosvenor, Henson, and Haynes, were all appointed to command, and had proceeded to their several stations."

The damages were laid at 5,000*l.*

Mr. *Chitty* opened the pleadings.

After a very long trial, the Chief Justice charged the Jury, who retired for about half an hour, and returned a verdict for the plaintiff—Damages 600*l.* 


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002376/18190124/023/0004
British Luminary - Sunday 24 January 1819

DOMESTIC POLITICS.

TRIUMPH OF FRANK WARD OVER LORD CASTLEREAGH!

The recompense which his great, State Persecutors withheld, and the justice which they refused, and were indemnified for having violated, have at length been rendered to the injured FRANCIS WARD, by an honest English Jury.

The proceedings in this case of WARD V. CLEMENT, the proprietor of the *Observer*, which was tried on the 16th inst. in the Court of King's Bench, will now be read with lively interest; and the verdict affords fresh grounds of exultation to the friends of humanity, and fresh evidence of the prevailing spirit of justice and independence in the breasts of our enlightened and impartial fellow-countrymen, whenever an appeal is made to their decision from the attacks of calumny that works in darkness, or the assaults of arbitrary power, to bold to be disguised.

When FRANK WARD was cast into prison, sustaining the oppressions of the iron hand of power, in a state of ruin, and without trial or redress, the *Observer* became the instrument of his utter destruction, by publishing the greatest calumnies against him; and Lord Castlereagh felt himself emboldened, from his privilege, to go greater lengths in the House of Commons than the proprietor of the *Observer* durst attempt in his columns. According to his Lordship, WARD was literally a man covered over with crimes. No character could be more infamous than his was represented to be. His case was considered sufficient to drown all opposition to the demands of Ministers.

Now, Reader, attend! WARD is liberated from a State Prison, without a single charge against him. He, in his turn, becomes a Plaintiff: he demands a Trial. He challenges all inquiry into his character and conduct; and though his case had been selected by Lord CASTLEREAGH, as the strongest his Lordship could find for enormity of guilt, yet when he appeared in open Court, and a fair opportunity of proof was afforded and called for, not the least shadow of evidence was offered in support of any of these heinous allegations on the part of his Majesty's Ministers, and not the least attempt was made by Mr. CLEMENT in the cause, to justify the Libel!

We cannot fail to advert to a circumstance which transpired in the course of the evidence, and which is well deserving attention. Many of the Papers on which the libel was printed, it appears, were without stamps, and on that account gratuitously distributed by the AGENTS of GOVERNMENT. This shows the favour with which Papers that ADVOCATE the cause of Government are regarded by those who are in exclusive possession of the channels of transmission, and who have other exemptions to grant, and privileges to bestow. To whose account the expense of circulating these bundles of calumny was placed, we may well conjecture. This is as black a transaction as we have seen on record for a long time, and we are truly sorry that the Press of a country, calling itself free, should ever be made the willing instrument of cruelty and injustice.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002577/18190118/017/0003
London Packet and New Lloyd's Evening Post - Monday 18 January 1819

LAW INTELLIGENCE.

COURT OF KING'S BENCH, JANUARY 16.

LIBEL.— WARD v. CLEMENT.

This was an action for a libel. The damages were laid at 5000*l.*

Mr. Scarlett stated the case to the Jury. The present was a case of no common interest in a political point of view. The plaintiff had raised himself from a lower situation to that of a master lace-manufacturer at Nottingham. He took part with the journeymen who stood out for the increase of wages, and gave them that increase himself. When the, disturbances broke out in that part of the country, Ward became the Treasurer; and when the Habeas Corpus was suspended in June, 1817, he was taken from his family by 10 or 12 Constables, and, after ineffectual applications to the Magistrates at Nottingham, he was conveyed to Cold Bath-fields prison, and from thence to Oxford, where he remained till the 13th of November following, when he was released. But when he arrived at Nottingham, he discovered, to his astonishment, that the Editor of a Newspaper, called *The Observer*, had sent into the world, on the 10th of November, 1817, a Paper, published different to the usual form, partly blank and without a stamp, differing materially from the Paper of the preceding day (Sunday), the 9th of November, of which it purported to be a second edition. In this Paper, under the head of "Derbyshire Insurrection, and Execution of the Convicted," a full detail of all the circumstances connected with those unfortunate proceedings is professed to be given; in the course of which Ward, the plaintiff, who knew nothing of politics or of Oliver, except what he might casually gain from reading a Newspaper, is accused of "being one of the individuals who formed the Secret Committee at Nottingham, to whom Oliver was introduced; and by whom he was informed that all was ready; and further, that some of the Luddites who were convicted and executed at Leicester, just previous to their execution, declared, that the plaintiff, Frank Ward, was one of the old Ned Ludds who were appointed to command the rebel forces; that he had proceeded to his appointed post, from whence he was, with others, to march, for the purpose of storming the barracks, at an appointed time." This was the libel.

Ann Ward, daughter of the plaintiff, deposed, that her father lived at Nottingham, and was known by the name of Frank Ward. He was a lace-manufacturer; employed 10 or 11 hands, and conducted his own business. Recollected the Constables coming to her father's house on the 15th of June, 1817; they searched the house, and, having, done so, left it before her father did; he afterwards went out; this was about four o'clock in the afternoon of Tuesday; after he went out he did not return, and on the Saturday morning after witness saw him in custody. He returned home soon after the 13th of November, 1817.

J. Holmes knew Oliver; was confined in Cold Bath-fields in the month of June; was taken up at Nottingham. Ward was in custody at the same time, so was Haines; they were brought up to Cold Bath-fields at the same time.

Mr. Goodyer, the publisher of *The Observer*, stated the number of Papers sold on Sunday, the 9th of November. It was impossible for him to say how many were pulled without stamps and given away. Mr. C, himself packed them up and sent them away. Witness was not present when he sent them away; does not know that Mr. Clement sent them by hundreds to the different Post-masters and prisons in the country; but knows that it was customary?? With Mr. Clement to give away a number of blank papers whenever any thing occurred to excite public interest.

Nelson, a letter-carrier at Derby, recollected receiving a large quantity of *Observers* one day in November 1817, from Mrs. Eaton, the gaoler's wife, to distribute about the town gratis.

Mr. Gurney, on the part of the defendant; addressed the Jury, and contended that Mr. Ward ought to have tried this cause in his own neighbourhood, if he felt that his character had sufFered any thing by what Mr. Clement had inserted in his paper, which could not have been maliciously done, as it arose from an account he had received of the disturbed counties.

The Chief Justice summed up, and went through a review of the libel, which he said contained circumstances of grave charge against the plaintiff; and the defendant having been proved the publisher, the plaintiff was intitled to a verdict; the question of damages, was one peculiarly for the consideration of the Jury; he would on this occasion, as he did on all others, recommend them to consider that question dispassionately, and to be guided in the sum they awarded by moderation, blended with justice, a course which he had no doubt they would pursue on the present occasion.

The Jury retired for near half an hour, when they returned, and by the mouth of Mr. Kirby, their Foreman, the late Sheriff of London, delivered a verdict for the plaintiff—Damages 600*l.* costs 40*s.*



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18190118/007/0003
Morning Chronicle - Monday 18 January 1819

TO DO

etc


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000540/18190128/011/0003
The Scotsman - Thursday 28 January 1819


TO DO

COURT OF KING'S BENCH

Saturday, Jan. 16.

LIBEL.— WARD V. CLEMENT.

 This was an action for a LilicL The damages were laid at L . 5, 000 . Mr SCARI . ETT stited the case to the Jury . The present was a case of ac?? common interest in a political point of view. The plaintiff had raised himself from a lower situation to that of a master lace-manufacturer at Nottingham. He took part with the journeymen who stood out for the increase of wages, and gave them that increase himself. When the disturbances broke out in that part of the country, Ward became the treasurer; and when the Habeas Corpus was suspended in June 1817, he was taken from his family by ten or twelve constables, and, after ineffectual applications to the Magistrates at Nottingham, he was conveyed to Coldbatd-fields prison, and from thence to Oxford, where he remained till the 13 th of November following, when he was released. But when he arrived at Nottingham, he discovered, to his astonishment, that the Editor of a Newspaper, called "The Observer," had sent into the world, on the 10th of November 1817, a paper published different to the usual form, partly blank, and without a stamp, differing materially from the paper of the preceding day, (Sunday,) the 9th of November, of which it is purported to be a second edition. In this paper, under the head of "Derbyshire Insurrection, and Execution of the Convicted, "a full detail of all the circumstances connected with those unfortunate proceedings is professed to be given, in the course of which Ward, the plaintiff, who knew nothing of politics or of Oliver, except what he might casually gain from reading a newspaper, is accused of "being one of the individuals who formed the secret committee at Nottingham, to whom Oliver was introduced, and by whom he was informed that all was ready; and farther, that some of the Luddites who were convicted and executed at Leicester, just previous to their execution, declared that the plaintiff, Frank Ward, was one of the old Ned Ludds who were appointed to command the rebel forces; that he had proceeded to his appointed post, from whence he was, with others, to march for the purpose of storming the barracks at an appointed time." This was the libel. - " . Ann Ward, daughter of the plaintiff, deposed, that her father lived in Nottingham, and was known by the name of Frank Ward . - He was a lace-manufacturer; employed ten or eleven hands, and conducted his own business; recollected the constables coming to her father's house on die iSth June 1817; they searched the house, and having 'lone so, left the house before her father did; he afterwards went out; this was about four o'clock in the afternoon of the Tuesday; after he went out he did not return, and on the Saturday morning after witness saw him in custody; he retui-ntid house 300 .. utter the 5th of November 1817 . J . Hiilmes knew Oliver; was confined in Coldbath-fields. i in the month of June ; was t-ikcn up at Nottinglia-. n ; Ward was in custody at ; h 3 s'iiii ( : ti"ie, i < i-was Haines ; they were brought up to Coldbath-fields at the siimi : time . Mr Mallinson, from . the i-ita'np office, produced copies of The Observer newspaper, of the d 4 tes of Nov . 9 th and Nov . 10 th, 1817 . Mr Burke, also from the Stamp-office, produced the affidavit of the defendant, stating himself to be sole proprietor uf The Observer newspaper. Mr Goodyer, the publisher of The Observer, stated, that on Sunday, November 9 lh, there were 10, 850 of the Pi ' . per sol . i . On Monday the ! 0th, 2, 000 were published with stamps. It was impossible for hini to say how many were pulled without stamps and ^ iven away; thinks it impossible there should be so many as 20, 000 given away; could not bay tlnire was not 10, 000, but thinks there was not; Mr Clement himself packed them up and sent them away; witness was not present when he sent them away; does not know that Mr Clement sent them by hundreds to the different postmasters and prisons in the country, but knows that it was customary with Mr Clement to give away a number of blank papers whenever any thing occurred to c .-icitc public interest . Cross-examined—Tin; Monday Paper was a new paper. On the 10th November there was an account of the death of the Princess Charlotte; that article was that which most excited public curiosity. The unstamped papers contained no advertisements . - Nelson, a letter-carrier at Derby, recollected receiving ;» large quantity of Observers one day in November 1 . S 17, from Mrs Eaton, the gaoler's wife, to distribute about the town gratis . The' libel was then read. Mr Gurney, on the part of the defendant, addressed the Jury, and contended that Mr Ward ought to have tried this cause in his own neighbourhood, it ?? he felt that his character had suffered by any thing Mr Clement had inserted in his paper, which could not have been maliciously done, as it arose from an account he had received of the disturbed counties . The Chief-Justice summed up, and observed, that many topics had been noted on this occasion, which had nothing to do with the question the Jury had at present to consider; which was, whether the defendant was the publisher of the alleged libel, and if so, wh . it injury the plaintiff had sustained by the publication. The Learned Judge then went through a review of the libel, which he said contained circumstances of prave charge against the plaintiff; and the defendant having been proved the publisher, the plaintiff was entitled to a verdict; the question of damages was one peculiarly for the consideration of the Jury. He would on this occasion, as he did on all others, recommend them to consider that question dispassionately, and to be guided in the sum they awarded by moderation, blended with justice, a course which he had no doubt they would pursue on the present occasion. The Jury retired for near half an hour, when they returned, and liv the mouth of Mr Kirby, their foreman, the late Sheriff of London, delivered a verdict for the plaintiff;—Damages L . 6 iX ), costs • 30 s 


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000156/18190127/018/0004
Bury and Norwich Post - Wednesday 27 January 1819

CASE OF MR. WARD.

In our last a brief statement appeared of an action brought by a Mr. Ward against the proprietor of the Observer newspaper. — Few of our readers can forget the debate in the House of Commons on the 17th of February last, on a motion for inquiry into the allegations of the Petitions from those who were confined under the Suspension of our Liberties. On that occasion Lord Castlereagh entered minutely into the case of one of the petitioners, in order to shew, that as he had been guilty of the grossest misrepresentations, no reliance was to be placed in the statements of any of them, and consequently that no enquiry was necessary. The case he selected was that of Francis Ward. This man he stated to have been the instigator of the destruction of machines in various places, for which he had paid the perpetrators. This man, it was said, had plotted various outrages — was treasurer of the Luddites — had offered premiums for the murder of the Judge at Leicester — in short, his Lordship considered the bare recital of his crimes sufficient to deter the House from crediting the statements of the other sufferers, and such was its effect. This triumph was thrown in the teeth of the opposition repeatedly throughout the Session; but how does the plain truth support it? Mr. Ward was a master lace-manufacturer, but having been a journeyman would not lower his wages in conjunction with the other masters, and when the men stood out for an increase of prices, as his own were liberally paid, he took the part of the rest, and upon some of the turn-outs being committed for trial, collected subscriptions for their legal defence in Court. Soon after this he was thrown into gaol, and having been removed from prison to prison, was at the end of five months sent home, without the slightest cause being assigned for his imprisonment. On reaching Nottingham, he found the libel had been circulated just *three days* before his liberation. The purport of the libellous matter, for which 600*l.* damages were given, was the same as the charge made against Mr. Ward in the House of Commons by Lord Castlereagh. It must appear somewhat singular to those who are ignorant of the artifices of political intrigue, that an individual in the humble walks of life should have obtained large damages for the mere imputation of that very criminality, which had been visited upon the person of the plaintiff by five months' imprisonment under the detestable Suspension Act. All have heard of the odious doctrine of modern jurisprudence, that truth is a libel; but no one would expect to find it enforced in favour of a man in low circumstances! Yet for following up the assertions of the Ministry (and who can doubt their words?) is Mr. Clement fined 600*l.* O! admirable impartiality of the British Law, which is thus jealous of the defamation of the poor as well as the rich! — some will exclaim. Truly the laws, or rather the juries, are impartial, but not in the perversion of reason and equity. It is for no truth that Mr. C. suffers. — He did not even attempt to extenuate his fault, or to mitigate the damages, by proving the statement he had published. On the contrary, the whole evidence went to confute the charges alleged against Mr. Ward.

The connexion of Government with the proprietor of 'The Observer,' in the publication of so malignant a libel, is rendered manifest by the evidence given on the trial. All applications heretofore made to the Commissioners of Stamps, for leave to distribute *gratuitously* an additional sheet to a newspaper, in order to afford, on some particular occasions, more ample information to the public, have been refused, the Commissioners saying they had no power to *dispense* with the existing law of the land. But in the case of 'The Observer,' a second sheet *unstamped* was given away in profuse numbers. A *dispensing power* appears to be exercised somewhere. The fact is sworn to at the trial. Robert Webster, a letter-carrier at Derby, "swore that on Monday, the 10th of November, he received a great quantity of 'The Observer' newspapers: they were delivered to him by Mrs. Eaton, the wife of the gaoler at Derby, who desired him to deliver them gratuitously, and she gave him a shilling for so doing." Thomas Cook, a letter-carrier at Leicester, deposed upon oath, that "he also received a quantity of 'Observers' — he received them at the post-office with his letters; thought it unusual. He was desired to deliver them *gratuitously*, and accordingly he did so; he received *two or three shillings at the post-office* for his trouble. Another letter-carrier, (he knew) at Derby, acted in like manner, and was in like manner remunerated.

Lord Castlereagh declared to the dependents of the Treasury, that he derived his information from the confessions of two malefactors who were executed, the one at Leicester and the other at Nottingham. This was fortunate; for '*dead men tell no tales*'. At least, however, after the Observer had been *suffered* to be circulated unstamped by the servants of the Government, (which if it was not an encouragement was certainly a dispensation) it would but have been consistent to have brought forward such proofs as bad satisfied Lord C. in order to help Mr. Clement out of his awkward predicament. Can any one imagine the Ministry would suffer odium, or at least suspicion, to affix to themselves, by the conviction of the proprietor of a newspaper for a libel they had countenanced, whilst they have the means of clearing the character of the defendant, and thereby their own? — The whole business is of a piece with the other evidence of the *green bag*.

But on perusing the admirable speech of Mr. Macdonald in the House of Commons on Thursday, one expression seems to strike forcibly upon this subject, and we trust premises an investigation of the subject within those walls where first it was published. The Ministers, exclaimed the Hon. Gentleman, "might continue to cry 'wolf,' they might resort to violence and rigour; they might suspend the constitutional rights of the subject; *they might themselves violate the law by turning libellers*; but the end of all would be that they would recruit the ranks of their enemies, and ensure their own destruction, after they had thrown odium on the Prince they served and left the Crown almost without support!"

A dinner took place on Tuesday at the Crown and Anchor Tavern, at which about 100 persons were assembled, to celebrate the triumph of Ward. Holmes, one of the persons who had been imprisoned during the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, ascribed his imprisonment to his efforts to detect Oliver. Mr. Charles Pearson, the solicitor of Mr. Ward, stated, that having been much impressed by Lord Castlereagh's statement, he had gone to Nottingham to ascertain, to his own satisfaction, the real character of Ward. He found that all whose motives for hating him were so obvious, and creditable to Mr. W. loved and respected him. His character for veracity had been impeached by representing that he had, in his Petition, complained of his dungeon as damp while in fact it was quite an Elysium. He examined that dungeon, and actually filled his hand with water by drawing it up the wall! Ward had an appearance of great simplicity and modesty.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0002646/18190118/008/0003?browse=true
Star (London) - Monday 18 January 1819

LAW INTELLIGENCE

COURT OF THE KING'S BENCH, JANUARY 16.

WARD v. CLEMENT.

This was an action for libel brought against the Proprietor of the *Observer* Newspaper. The libel complained of appeared in November, 1817, in the Monday impression of that Paper, and was as follows:

"DERBYSHIRE INSURRECTION.— We shall proceed to give our Readers a more authentic, as well as more minute account of the rise and progress of the insurrection, connected as it was with almost all the manufacturing towns in the kingdom, than has hitherto been published; from whence the Public will be enabled to form a correct estimate of the real character of the danger by which the country was threatened, and the absolute necessity which was imposed upon the Minister of the Home Department to determine upon the appointment of the Commission at Derby. The sources of our authority, though extended over a considerable part of the disturbed counties, are highly respectable, and we can pledge ourselves for the correctness of every fact that we shall state.

"The 27th of May, Birkin accompanied Oliver to Nottingham, and introduced him to the Secret Committee assembled there—among whom were, Haynes, Holmes, Grosvenor, Henson, and Frank Ward."

Again:—"It is a singular fact, and may here be stated, that at the execution of the *Luddites* who were tried at the Nottingham Assizes, these unhappy men confessed that a plan had been formed for insurrection and rebellion, and that *Old Ned* (meaning *Ned Ludd*) was to command. Some of the most desperate of these had been pointed out to storm the barracks, and to perform other dangerous duties. Frank Ward, Grosvenor, Henson, and Haynes, were all appointed to command, and had proceeded to their several stations."

The damages were laid at £5,000.

Mr. CHITTY opened the pleadings.

TO DO

 Mr. stated the case. re should, he said, shew a claim to a verdict upon the great principles of the Constitution, and only touch incidentally upon other points, which so naturally suggested themselves, in a case, where so -mach personal injury was sustained. The plaintilf was new a poor, a ruined man. He had commenced life in the town of Nottingham in an humble way, ae a journeyman manufacturer of lace, and by his integrity and industry became much respected. In a few years, he found that the fruits of those habits for which he was remarkable enabled him to employ others. lie became a master, and added to the favourable impression of his character, creditably supporting an aged mother, a wife, and children. to whose society he devoted himself. Temperate, and retired, and frugal, he permitted the security he enjoyed in the bosom of his family to be disturbed by no political discord. His anxiety for the prosperity of those whose avocations resembled his, induced him to become a member of a Society for assessian the price of work ; and such was the idea entertained of his integrity and worth, that the members elected him their treasurer, a situation which he filled to the satisfaction of all. At that unfortunate period of distress amongst the journeymen, on which dissensions arose, the humanity of the plaintiff was easily discoverable ; for it was soon found that he had not kept pace with the more opulent manufacturers in mincing the wages of the workmen. lie had been pi n e himself, and he pitied the poor; he had known what want was, and he chose rather to check the progress of his own accumulation, than to diminish the comforts of those by whose labour he had attained his superiority. The consequence of this generous feeling was the rallying round him of numbers on workmen, and the jealousy of those who had acted upon a more interested system. No one doubted his integrity, and lie continued to pursue an uneleviitting coarse, content with the advantages resulting from industry, and happy in the commendation of his own heart. At length those dissensions with which several parts of the country were agitatea broke out into a formidable shape, and here the propriety stamped upon the plaintiff's general conduct was not backward in exhibiting itself. He exerted himself to the utmost to check the progress of those unhappy ebul- Aitions. Government thought it necessary to interfere, for outrages were committed, which required the interposition of a stronger authority than that of individuals. Several of those who were presumed have been implicated were apprehended; and as it was supposed that some might have been improperly suspected, a subscription was set on foot, to &tear for the accused the advantages of an able defence—na thing the more necessary, as under such circumstances, a difficulty might arise in procuring an unbiassed Jury. The subscription was made in the most open manner, and none of those who subscribed laboured under the slightest imputation of disloyalty for the part they had taken. The plaintiff was applied to receive those subscriptions. He refused, but on being pressed, consented to perform the office, and acted in this new capacity to the satisfaction of all. It was worthy of remark, that of all who had been accused, but one was convicted — a proof that the plaintiff was justified in his opinion that his own conduct was deserving of no reprehension. lie, however, became an object of suspicion; and upon the suspension of the Habeas Corp us Act, was considered a person of such formidable character by the Magistrates, that they thought it due to their own character for activity, to exercise the power Ulrich was just given, and issue such directions respecting him, as a degree of zeal, rendered intemperate perhaps by their suspicions. - dictated. On the 10th of June, 18I7, while with his family, ten or twelve Constables entered his house, and without a warrant, proceeded to search it from top to bottom. they did not omit to examine every canister and shimble, — and to this day no motive was stated for so extraordinary a liberty. Indignant at the insult, he determined, with the keeling ream al to an Englishman, to complain to those from whom he expected redress; and by the advice of a Professional Gentleman,-whom he consulted as to the best means of vindicating his character from the consequence of such as outrage, applied to the Magistrates for an explanation. Conscious of his own innocence, he demanded the authority on which the security of his home, and the peace of his family were assailed. He was advised to forbear, but he felt his own indee virulence, and with a boldness; inspired by integrity, persevered in demanding the cause of such strange ,sod wanton persecution. - The event was such as might be imagined, where power was wielded by those who were unqualified to use it with the modes * ration. b 4 a glory round authority. The plaintiff was committed to prison, He asked them for bread, and siwy.savelim a . stone. - He lay captive, and ahandonrisi, for some time. waret thew cams down for his removal from Nottingham awl he was conducted Coldbath-fields prison niao',:cbairied: ((Liars 'coMpti',limit' Sidmouth :Too bii - istimaOti., ~ , I he • • stated that hit; T.realship had intim to the hat he should have every advantage a nerstai in ale situation required.) From Coldbath-fields raison ;,p was remove to the County gaol of Oxford, he remained till the fah November, ctea flnenteat almo a solitary; and from thence, without being informed of the cease of so surprising change, was returned to the bosom of his ramify in his native town. But he returned with :t bicker, spirit, to a mother redoeolato.extraate. misery, to .4, wife broken-hearted. His conscience vs, Itc.wever, void. of offence, atal he looked forward to increased industry for the niertas of diatieishing the calamities jet° which he had been plunged. The Jury would be surprised to hear, that what had been kept a secret from the plaintiff, was published to all England by the Editor of a Newspaper,' which assumed in its tone to derive its authority from a source of unquestionable truth. And here, the Learned Counsel said, he would state, that he believed from his soul there was truth in the instructions he had received, declaring that client was wholly innocent of the crimes with which be was dais charged. He was not a member of any political society, nor did he take a part in the politics of the day. He lived retired with his filthily; and all he knew of politics was derived from the daily sources of intelligence with which the public were supplied indiscriminately. He never saw Oliver, nor did he know, except from rumour, that such a person existed. He expected, on returning to Nottingham, that former good character may remove any bad impression that might have been made - by the disgrace of imprisonment, and, that a future investigation would r ove that he bad been persecuted. What then must have his feelings, upon finding the paper now in Court, containing an attack upon him, which had been circulated v:liee he was in prison, calculated to poison the mind of every -one in whore ear the name of Ward was sounded, mid published with such an appearance. of authenticity as to render disbelief of all its circumstances impossible? What would the Jury think upon hearing it proved that a considerable number of Papers were issued from the Owner Office, each with a blank side, without any stamp, on Monday, 'the 10 th of November, professing to give an accurate history of the disturbances, and of all those scenes which led to the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, as if the Observer hail !Act made the organ of Government? Was not this calculated to affect the tribunal of justice, and to distort the public opinion? Under what colour had Kr. ('lenient presumed to publish this calumny, and to insinuate that he had in authority not to be shaken for its insertion ? The Pawned Counsel would say, for he looked without prejudice, that he considered the &Armee a respectable paper; but that character rendered it the more formidable, where character was attacked. It was worthy of observatien, that this paper, which was published on the Monday, did not contain in its Sunday edition a tittle of the article which was the subject of the present action; and that the Paper he held in his hand was gratuitously circulated through all parts of the country without a under tins pretence of being a specimen of Cie ,type. Mr. Scarlett read parts of the libel, and asked ally Mr. Clement had not come fore :aid with' boasted proofs that he was jaatiaed ? The article seas Well, composed a it was well. done, and ttaca down a &exiled series of circumstances upon a It entered into a vitalica!ion ef,Go.verument,t and was, in fact,, a covernraent manifestia, tAiiistie was in sedition, until he time armed. before them, vested With command. and actually . about to. perform signal act of treason, by stotMing the barrd.ch. Here then he stood, deserving to he imaged, dream, andquartered, .and to be visited with those privations which the ' law billeted upon-traitors. Ile *as convicted, .by die Observer, of being connected with Oliver ; of beingame of the desperate Ned beds ; of making war against the King anthills Government, and of taking his station among the most deeded enemies of his country ! All this was attributed to a man who was wholly unconcerned with political matters, and who was deprived of all means of remedy, except that of daring his accuser to bring.for. ward his authority, a defiance from which Mr. Clement shrunk. If this question -acre viewed abstracted from all political censidei ations, what would be the opinion of its merits, viewed merely with reference to that Constitution by which Eivaland had attained such a high degree of political glory as was envied by all Europe, and value] by all. who valued order and liberty? The personal liberty of an Englishman was his chartered privilege; and if that elevated part of the Constitution. the ilahea , : Corpus Act, was at any time suspended in cow:cep:viler of real or supposed danger, it was a season of calamity ; those who were exposed to it were left to the discretion of M inisters,aad also subject to the crafty operational private malignity. In such an extremity it became all good men to pity those who were dragged from,their homes .and immured in a prison, without the opportunity of justification. It became every good man to look with great jealousy to the power thus added to the authority of Ministers, as well as to regret the necessity that for a time destroyed the right which the immortal Blackstone desctihed as the unfailing security of the British Constitution. But what had Mr. Clement shine? While the unhappy plaintiff was withid the walls of a prison, in expectation of being bror.;llt face to face with his accusers ; while Government thought it necessary to detain him there from a pro. seated necessity, Mr. Clement had the audacity, the inhumanity, to publish against the helpless 2,a abandoned man, a calumny of the most effective kind, which no one could read xvithoitt,*cayirs; tho whsle matter had been fully investigated, and t:haas-ertion L .of Ward's guilt was bottomed upon Volt:I-sisal:le an- I thority. What could have been the metive.? If Wind was to be tried, why prejudice the Jury against him ; and if not, why fix on him ever the stigma w hi c h his imprisonment' had already in dege* 'ri v en rise to? This wa s what the plaintiff' had to complain t of—that during the suspension of the habeas Corpus Act, Mr. Clement had endeavoured to oppress aft a l re ady oppressed man ; that he had endeavoured to prejudice the minds of the Jury by whom it was paesumed be would have been tiled ; to wrest from him ' c he beneSt of a fair anti impartial hearing, • rod to ahoy the Liberty of the Press. The Learned and inf. g euious Counsel for .Mr. k!letnent might attempt to .retest his client by general, observations on hat •v. He.(Mr. Starlet) wereld..tell the jury villa: h t of the Liberty ci . tho He con 


1 t dered the Liberty of the Press, and the Habeas Corpus Act, and Trial by Jury, as sacred parts of the Constitution. • The people of England had enjoyed the Liberty of the Press since the revolution, and GOD fortiid they should . ever lose it. He felt a greater anxiety on this subject, freer a circumstance that had lately come to his knowledge. An ingenious foreigner, Who was perhaps acqUainted with the engines of this Government, published a work, since translated, Leading to chew that there were disadvantages con-, meted with this sacred privilege, which reedered the protection of it nmadvisablb. The man who would assail this important sight should be considered as a public enemy ; and in proportion as the right which he attempted to violate was sacred, that violation ought to be punished. The Liberty of the Press meant, that all might drink as they pleased, and publish what they thought , without previous controul. But th at liberty was incompatible with the power to destroy . private character. If thatwere the definition of the liberty of. the press, it would be a despotism under which no man could live. This sacred power had been by Mr. Clement's: who had wielded the mighty engine that gave and tack away character, and had the• power to throw open the doors of the prison -house, with hand guided by none of those sentiments of benignity so cheethig to the possessor. The person pleaded for was a man of an honest, temperate life—unhappy-- Lad been a captive for several months without guilt ; and against this object was the authority of the press exercised ; against him were the minds of the people misened, by the sting of - this publication, which repAsented bins as a man capable of treason, spoil, and revolution. Why should this be added to the stock of calamity of him.-who had been snatched from his family, with whom he had enjoyed the sweets of his industry too dearly to think of disterbint; theland in which his labours had been rewarded? With respect to-the damages . , it was only necessary to say that the plaintiff had been traduced when he liachm means of vindicating himself; and that the iejury had Foie into welded circulation by the intim:tee of him to whop owed this outrage upon hit feelings. The following evidence was then called: Ann Ward (examined by Mrs DenssAts).—Witness - is the daughter of the plaintiff, Frank Ward; he is a lace-manufacturer, conducting his own business, and employing ten or journeymen. Witness re-membered the constables coming to her father's house on the 10th June, 1617, and searching it, but they did . not take any thini? away. They remained there nearly an houri.and when they went away, her fadier followed them. This way en the Tuesday and she did not see her father again till she saw him- in prison on the Seturday followinee lie did not return to his family till the middle of November. - Samuel Payne, Lsq. (examined Mr. Witness is a Solici:r in Nottingham. He remem-1 bleed meeting the pi.tinti .(Ward)- on the 10th oft June, in the street at Nottingham. After relating what had happened at his house, he asked what wits the best :wide of obtaining redress? Witne:s advised him to apply to the Magistrates, where they! were sitting. Witness understood that be did do so, aad that he was by them committed to prisoe. Cross-examined by Mr. Gees:zee—The plaintiff did not call upon him at his house ; but when he met him in the street, he was coming in a direction from his own house to that of the witness. Ile believed the plaintiff had previously laia under. some suspicion with the Magistrates, on accoueit of his having been the treasurer of a -subscription raised for the purpose of defending some pin-sons who were tried at Leicester.. John Holmes (examined by Mr. DasistAN).--Witens is a lace-maker at Nottingham ; he knew Oliver t care in Jude, 1817 witness was apprehended and sent to Coldbath-fields prison ; Ward, the plaintiC, was in prison at Nottingham at the same time as! witness, and he saw him ironed to a man of the' name of Haynes, when they • were all brought to Coldbath-fields prison together. William Cliffe gave evidence to the same effect, and added, that he and the plaintiff, after remaining in Coldbath-fields prison about a week, were taken together to Oxford Castle, and there kept in clew confinement the 13th of November, 1617. (Mr. Demean was proceeding with the examination of this witness, as to the manner of their confinement, on • which Mr. rose and objected to the questions as irrelevant to the case before the Court; and the Court being of the'saine opinit a,' after some conversation, the witness was ordered to steed down.) George Goodger is deputy Publisher of the 06- senor. the sale of the Paper is very great. Its sale on Sunday, the 9th of Novera'a,r, 1517. was a.id. the Monday edition (200 J, exclusive of the nnstamped ones, of which be keew nothing. He could net form any idea how many were sent out unstampthey not having passed through his hands. The Monday Observer had twice, v..hen public interest was excited, after the regular publication, published an additional impression upon unstaniped sheets, with a blank leaf, in the way of the one produced. Robert Webster (examined by Mr. DENMAN)...-.. is a letter-carrier at Derby. On Monday, the of November, 1817, he received a great go-laity of the Observer Newspaper. They were d..livered to him by Mrs. Eaton, v-;fe of.the jailer at Derby, who desired him to distribute. them grateitcisly ; and she gave him a shillinte far so, doing. delivered them to the Lawyers, the Doctors, and the Gentlemen of the town. Thomas Cook is a lette:-carrier at Leicester. Met received a quantity of Monday 01 vvcrs in November, 1817 ; thought as many as 209. He eeiv gd them at the Post-office with his letters; thous* it was not usual to receive them in that way... Ile /as desired to distribute the gratuitously, and accord. ingly he did sa---some of them in thrtown; and others he gave to the country carriers, to take into the country. There was another letter-carrier at Leicester, and he also received the like quantity of Monday Observers to distribute in the same way. Witness received two or three shillings at the Post r office for his trouble. This closed the evidence for the plaiutiff. The alleged printed libel was then read by the clerk,. and compared with it (as set krth in the record). Mr. took several objections on account of inaccuracy, but they fere over-ruled by the Coati Mr. Gummy then Jose to address the Jury in de. fence. He heartily concurred in the observation of Li; Li:trued Vac'id, that political feelings ought not to enter discussions at the bar; at the same time, he could not help observing that his Learned Friend's practiCe, in the manner of conducting this cause, little accorded with his professions. His Learned Friend could not truly say, that politics had not been. mixed up in the statement of his client's case. If any person bad only heard three-fourths or four-fifths of his Learned Friend's very eloquent speech, he must? have imagined that this was not an action against Mr. Clement, the Proprietor of the Observer Newspaper, but an action against the Secretary of State, for illegally imprisoning and cruelly oppressing the plaintiff. In truth, he (Mr. Gurney) believed that the statement which his Learned Friend was instructed to make, was much more the object of this action than any damages which the plaintiff could affect to have sustained, or could hope from the defendant. His Learned Friend, in the course of his address, had let out some things that were rather extraordinary, some things a little inconsistent with what every man knew as matter of history—some things which would excite in one's mind a suspicion that the plaintiff really could not have sustained any injury or damage from this publication. His Learned Friend would represent to the Jury, that the shocking outrages which were committed in the neighbourhood of Nottingham, which called for the interference of the Legislature, and which produced in that district a reign of terror, not unlike that which prevailed during the French Revolution, arose from the oppression and cruelty of the masters towards their journeymen and that Mr. Ward, recollecting that he had once himself been a poor journeyman, would not treat those persons in the oppressive and extortionate manner in which they had been treated by other masters. (Mr. Gurney) believed he might take it as matter of history that this representation of his Learned Friend was not quite true; but whatever was the cause of those disturbances, it was as foreign to the matter before the Jury as to any other cause tried during the Eirtirigs, or which remained to be tried.— Great part of his Learned Friend's speech was addressed to this point, namely, that Mr. Ward, who, when he ceased to be sure of the approbation, and ceased to become an object of confidence with one set of persons (who those were it was easy to judge), had become an object of distress?? and suspicion with all ; that Mr. Ward was arrested—that he was arrested under a charge of treasonable practices, and confined from the 16th of June, until the 13th of November; and that every possible attempt was made to excite unfavourable feelings respecting him. But slimly, if Mr. Ward's imprisonment were the act of the Executive authority, and if the defendant were ignorant of the object of it, not one word said upon this subject could be applicable to the case against him. Clement, who could have. nothing to do with the plaintiff's imprisonment. If the defendant had nothing to do with that act (justifiable or not); surely  the introduction of such a topic could only be for the purpese of exciting an nitdae impression against him, and make him account for the conduct of others. His Learned Friend had stated, that the plaintiff had been ground down and opposed. The Jury were not to assume that merely upon the statement of his Learned Friend, who had also said that the plaintiff was deprived of the means of seeking redress, in consequence of the passing of as Act of Indemnity. -It was true that the Legislature had passed an Act of Indemnity; and amongst other reasons assigned for. that measure were, first, because it was notorious that a treasonable conspiracy had existed in the country; and next, that it would not be fit or proper that the lives of those who had given information of such conspiracy should be put in hazard from the malice of their enemies, should their names be given. But these considerations had nothing whatever to do with the question how before the Court, which simply was, what injury the plaintiff had sustained from the defendant? This was the siiTle question for the consideration of the Jury, and that was to be ascertained by discovering as well as they could, in what the injury consisted. Did they believe that the plaintiff had sustained any injury from this publication? Did they believe that those who thought ill of. him before, would think worse of him for the article which appeared in the Observer? Did they believe that those who thought well of him before, would think worse of him by reading the supposed libel? If they did not, why then what injury could this plaintiff have sustained, which would entitle him to call upon the Jury for any amount of damages against the defendant? But there was one single feature in this case which would at once decide the point for their consideration. The plaintiff stated in his declaration that he had deservedly acquired the good opinion of all his fellow subjects, and that for the purpose of bringing him into public scandal, infamy, and disgrace, the libel in question was published; and it concluded by alleging that divers of his neighbours had thought the worst of him on that account. If this were the case, why did he not bring his action amongst his neighbours? Why did he, who lived in Nottingham, and who told the Jury that he had lost the good opinion, and high estimation of all his neighbours, in consequence of this publication, try this case where his character and conduct were best known, amongst those neighbours whose estimation he had lost by means of this libel? He (Mr. Gurney) must say that he thought the conduct of the plaintiff, in bringing his action miles from Nottingham, in a place where be was utterly unknown, was the clearest and most decisive proof that he had suffered no damage whatever. Nothing was more clear than that a man who complained of being injured in the estimation of his neighbours, and had, in fact, suffered that injury, would bring his action among those ,neighbours, instead of waiting for a considerable of time, and then bring it before a Jury by whom he was unknown; when in fact he ought have tried his case at Nottingham, either in March or July last. Such conduct on the part of the plaintiff was decisive judgment against himself. Admitting, however, that the plaintiff was Mankato a verdict, the only remaining question was, the amount of damages he was entitled to receive, The defendant was undoubtedly liable to a verdict against himself. - His Learned Friend admitted that the Observer was one of the most respectable public journals, and reflected credit generally upon its conductors. It should be recollected that the defendant was the Proprietor of the Paper, and not the author of the article, which was given to him by a person who assured him that it was well founded. It appeared, however, that he had been misinformed in that respect; and certain!! 

he (Mr. Gurney) alid:.not stand there to amen its truth. The defendant had put no justification on the record, and therefore he had not aggravated the supposed Cause of offence. The Jury would recollect that the amount of damages they should give must be measured by the amount of the injury; and he who did not bring his action, and try his case, where he affected to have received the injury, and where the injury could be best estimated, gave the strongest judgment against himself that the injury had been little or none. The Cuter , Rivets, in charging the Jury, said no man could doubt that the matter contained in the alleged libel was calculated to injure the character of the plaintiff, and as no attempt had been made to justify it, the necessary consequence was, that it must be taken to be untrue. Several topics had been addressed to the Jury, on the one side and on the other, which, in his Lordship's humble judgement, could in no way he involved in this case. This . art had nothing to do with the policy or impolicy of the Legislature, in suspending the Habeas Corpus Act; "cher the long detail of matter contained in the libel was true or untrue had nothing to do with the question which the Jury had to tiny, the only consideration being the damage which the plaintiff had sustained by having Ins nan;e coupled with the disgraceful and highly criminal acts detailed in the libel. It appeared that this statement was published at a time when the plaintiff was in confinement upon charges for which he was likely to be brought to trial; and certainly such a publication was calculated to prejudice the minds of those by whom he would probably have been tried, had the proceedings gone further. Nothing was more improper than publications tending to prejudice the cases of persons merely committed on suspicion of offences, because nothing was more likely to affect the interests of public justice. It had been very properly observed upon, that the plaintiff had declined to bring his action at Nottingham, where his character might be supposed to be best known; and the Jury would take that circumstance into consideration in estimating the damages, and in doing so, they would exercise that temper and discretion which the due administration of justice required.

The Jury retired for about half an hour, and returned a verdict for the plaintiff—Damages 600*l.*


http://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002643/18190120/017/0001
British Press - Wednesday 20 January 1819

DINNER TO MR. WARD.

Yesterday a complimentary dinner was given at the Crown and Anchor Tavern to Mr. Ward, of Nottingham, upon the successful issue of the late trial for a libel, in which he was Plaintiff.

At five o'clock the dining-room was quite full, and upwards of one hundred persons of respectability sat down to an excellent dinner;  
Mr. LEMAITRE, in the Chair.

After the cloth was removed the Chairman gave— “The Sovereignty of the People, end may its power be speedily secured by a Radical Reform."— Three times three.

 TO DO


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002757/18190124/015/0003
Constitution (London) - Sunday 24 January 1819

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002577/18190120/023/0004
London Packet and New Lloyd's Evening Post - Wednesday 20 January 1819