# Croppers Song

In Peel


John Walker

Every week when he returned home he brought exciting reports of what he called the “ stir- rings ” at Huddersfield and.elsewhere, and the discontented croppers of Liversedge assembled in large numbers at the Shears Inn, the general meeting place of the craft, every Sat- urday night to listen to his highly coloured recitals of the doings of the workmen in other places. To those whom he knew could be trusted, Hall whispered the secret that the men at Huddersfield were banding themselves together to destroy ‘‘ the cursed machines,” and that he had become a member of the or- ganisation formed to accomplish that object. To Hall’s hungry and desperate companions violent measures seemed the only likely ones to succeed in stopping the rapid increase of the hated machinery, and they became eager to eprol themselves in the secret society which promised such a summary and speedy redress

Page 45
THE RISINGS OF THE LUDDITES. 43

of their wrongs, it was therefore eventually arranged that Hall should ask some one belonging to the organisation to come over with him and meet the Liversedge croppers to explain to them its objects and methods of working more fully. The Shears Inn, at Hightown, which bore and still bears on its sign-board a representa- tion of the implement used by the croppers in their trade, was, as we have already stated, a house generally resorted to by men engaged in that business. A few of the craft patronised ‘little Hammond,” of the White Hart, a Crofton man, who had formerly belonged to the cropper’s craft; and a few, James White- head, the jolly host of the Cross Keys ; but the popular gathering place was the Shears. That they were good customers tor the landlord’s ale when they had money in their pockets may be guessed from one of the wildest Yorkshire legends extant, which we will give as briefly as possible, as it shows what opinions were entertained of the crpppers by contemporaries before the obnoxious frames were invented, and when they were able to dictate very often their own terms to their masters when the latter had urgent orders on hand. We give it in the words of a most reliable authority :— ‘‘ The tradition is, that in consequence of their dissipated aud wicked ways all the croppers at their departure:from this world went to a cer- tain place which, to describe it negatively, was neither purgatory nor Paradise, and that in the course of time they became so numerous in that particularly warm region, and withal so very, very unruly, that the devil was at his wits’ end what to do with them and had no pleasure of hislife in their company. Get rid of them he could not. There they were, and in spite of all remonstrances declared they would not depart nor yet mend their manners.

Page 46
44 THE RISINGS OF THE LUDDITES.

One day, while pondering on his difficult position, a brilliant idea occurred to his Satanic majesty. He knew the fondness of the crop- pers when on earth for ale, whether good or bad, so he went to the door of the infernal regions and bawled out ‘Ale! ale! ale!’ with all his might. The effect was magical. At the joyful sound all the croppers were seized instantaneously with a burning thirst, and they rushed out to a man, helter skelter. No were they all out than Satan slipped quickly in, bringing the door to and locking it after him, shouting through the keyhole to the astonished and deluded croppers outside, ‘ Now curse you, I’ve got you out and I'll keep you out. I'll take care no more croppers ever come in here!’ And that is given as the reason why no more croppers entered the infernal regions.” The Shears Inn was at the beginning of the century one of the most substantial buildings in the locality im which it stands, most of the surrounding property being ordinary cottages, although there were a few good houses, of which Abraham Jackson’s, the currier, wasone. Mr. Jackson was then in a pretty large way of business, and occupied besides the buildings round his homestead the old house across the road, known as Noah’s Ark, as a leather ware- house. The interior arrangement of the Shears Inn was, at the period of which we are writing, different to what it 1s at the present time. The bar was then at the back, at the right hand side of the passage, the other back room on a line with it being the kitchen, and over both the front rooms was the club room. It was in this large room that the meeting of the croppers was held at which the delegates from Hnddersfield were present, and which took place in February, 1812. Although it was still winter, according to the calendar,

Page 47
THE RISINGS OF THE LUDDITES. 45 ©

the morning had been sultry, and soon after midday the firmament became obscured by black clouds which rolled up steadily from the south, and an almost phenomenal darkness, which was long remembered. set in, continuing for some hours, and was followed by a heavy thunderstorm. Notwithstanding the warring elements the gathering of croppers that night at the Shears was large, and comprised mem- bers of the craft from Cleckheaton, Heck- mondwike, Gomers3al, Birstall, Mirfield, and more distant places. Had James Lister, the landlord, been aware of the real object of the meeting he would certainly have placed his veto upon it; for, although he naturally sym- pathised with the men who had been such excellent customers in the sufferings they were enduring, owing to the introduction of ma- chinery, he prided himself on being above all things a law-abiding citizen, and, a sheriff’s officer, considered himself a sort of Government functionary, and as such respon- sible in some degree for the good conduct of his neighbours. As we have said before, how- ever, the house had always being the chief resort of the croppers, and Lister was not aware that the meeting was other than a trade gathering of the fraternity to take into con- sideration the critical state of affairs. . William MHall, true to his promise, had brought with him two of his fellow workmen from Longroyd Bridge ; John Walker, a young man, who true specimen of the old rol- licking race of croppers, and Thomas Brook, a solid taciturn man, who was in almost every respect the antipodes of his companion, for while Walker was jovially fraternising with everybody around him, Brook sat stolidly apart, puffing his long pipe and replying only in monosyllables to the questions or observa- tions of the men around him. The old oak-

Page 48
46 THE RISINGS OF THE LUDDITES.

cased clock in the corner had long ago struck the hour on its clear sounding bell, and a rough looking man had risen to ask if it was not time to begin the meeting, when John Walker, who had been for some time imbibing more of Lister’s strong ale than was good for him, rose from his seat and extending his arms as if he would shake hands with every one present, cried out in cheery tones: — ah’m pleased to see you all. You muster weel, an’ am sure by the luke on you there’s some true grit in Liversedge. Me an’ my mate are pleased to beamong you. Ah can promise you ‘at we Huddersfield chaps will stand by you shoulder to shoulder till these cursed machines at’s robbing us of our trade are sent flying in a thousand shivers an’ them ‘sts made ’em are sent after them. You’ve a chap here lads ’at wants straightening up an’ wer’re ready to help you todo it. We hev his marrow over yonder, but General Ludd is bahn to heva word with him varry shortly. Well lads, ah’m no talker; ah mean business. My mate ahl happen say a few words to you in a bit, but afore ah sit dahn ah’ll sing you one of ahr Ludd ditties.” Taking a hearty swig at his mug of ale, Walker then struck up in true ballad patterer’s

style— THE CROPPER’S SONG. Come, cropper lads of high renown, Who love to drink good ale that’s brown, And strike each haughty tyrant down, With hatchet, pike, and gun! Oh, the cropper lads for me, The gallant lads for me, Who with lusty stroke The shear frames broke, The cropper lads for me!

What though the specials still advance, And soldiers nightly round us prance; The cropper lads still lead the dance, With hatchet, pike, and gun!

Page 49
THE RISINGS OF THE LUDDITES. 47

Oh, the cropper lads for me, The gallant lads for me, Who with lusty stroke The shear frames broke, The cropper lads for me!

And night by night when all is still And the moon is hid behind the hill, We forward march to Jo our will With hatchet, pike, and gun! Oh, the cropper lads for me, The gallant lads for me. Who with lusty stroke The shear frames broke, The cropper lads for me!

Great Enoch still shall lead the van Stop him who dare! stop him who can! Press forward every gallant man With hatchet, pike, and gun! Oh, the cropper lads for me, The gallant lads for me, Who with lusty stroke The shear frames broke, The cropper lads for me!

Long before Walker had come to the end of his song the rolicking chorus was eagerly caught up by his delighted audience, and when the end was reached the refrain was twice repeated with extraordinary vigour, many of the men beating time on the long table with their sticks and pewter mugs. If the object of the singer was to inspire the somewhat down- cast and dejected group with some of his own enthusiasm, he succeeded admirably, as was evident from the flashing eyes turned towards him from all parts of the room as he sat down, and the excitement continued during the whole of the meeting. Before the hearty plaudits had died away. Brooke, the other delegate, put down his pipe, rose slowly and deliberately to his feet and waited with calm self-possession till the meet-

Page 50
48 THE RISINGS OF THE LUDDITES.

ing had quieted down sufficiently to listen to him. In appearance he was, as we have said, very different to Walker. No smile lighted up his sombre, strongly marked features as in language which showed more education and re- finement, he told his hearers how the Luddite movement had extended to the Huddersfield district and the progress which had been made in the destruction of frames in that locality. ‘* We are playing a hazardous, nay a desperate game, we know full well,’’ he exclaimed, and his dark eyes lighted up as heraised his voice and struck his clenched fist on the table, ‘‘ We are playing a desperate game I say, but have we not been driven to it? Oppression makes wise men mad, and we refuse to die like dogs without making one bold stroke for the lives of our wives and our little ones, who are star- ving before our eyes. The masters show us no mercy, no pity. They will not give us a kind word, or throw us a crust of bread. We are clearly in the way, and they would fain thrust us and our misery out of their sight. But we claim a right to live in the land of our birth, and we refuse to be driven out of the country. Curse the machines!” he cried with savage energy, ‘‘and curse the men who make them! It cannot be right that we should suffer as we are suffering. It cannot be right that men who are able and willing to work should be thrust out with bitter taunts and scoffs to starve, or that our little ones should pine and wither away before our eyes. We must band ourselves together to sweep the hated frames from the face of the earth. It was @ mistake to allow Cartwright to set up those he is working in the valley yonder. You see the result. The other masters cannot compete with the machinery, and all other shops are gradually shutting up. I will tell you something that should interest you. We

Page 51
THE RISINGS OF THE LUDDITES. 49

have heard from our friends at Marsden that two more waggon loads of these frames are coming to Cartwright’s place next week. Now is your time men! If you do not want the bread filching from your mouths resolve now that that accursed load shall never cross Hartshead Moor !” Loud cheers mingled with fierce cries greeted Brooke as he sat down, which had not died away when a tall, dark man rose at the other end of the room. He had a short curt man- ner with him, and his speech was very brief and to the point. ‘‘ Friends,’ said he, in slow determined _ tones, ‘‘Tll make one to stop any more frames coming here. I think we have too many al- ready.’ The speaker’s name was John Hirst. He was one of Jackson’s men, and though he was no lover of violent methods the danger which seemed to beset his craft and the fiery appeal of Grooke had stirred even his sluggish nature, and he was eager to take any steps to prevent himself and his comrades from the utter ruin which seemed to him to be certain if the new invention was allowed to spread in this locality. Wam, thou’lt go with me,” added Hirst, in his short way appealing to a stout, easy looking personage.on the other side of the table, who had joined enthusiastically in cheer- ing every utterance of the delegates. ‘‘T will, Jack, I’m sure,” was the hearty response of the person appealed to, whose real name was Robert Whitwam. He wasalsoone of Jackson’s workmen, and resided in a little cottage on Clickem Hill. And I'll make a third’ cried Jonas Crow- ther, a determined looking man, with black bushy eyebrows and heavy jaws; ‘“‘and ah reckon my neighbour, Naylor, will keep me company,” he added.

Page 52
50 THE RISINGS OF THE LUDDITES.

Naylor, who was a man of less courageous stamp, was evidently taken aback by this sudden appeal and did not answer for atime, but he also at last fell in with the invitation, though not without some evident misgivings. So far the volunteers were all Jackson’s men, but representatives from other workshops including Cartwright’s, speedily volunteered, and the number eventually included a majority of those present, but the names we have given are all that have been handed down. Walker, who had greeted every accession to the Lud- dite ranks with loud expressions of gratifica- tion, promised that he and their townsman, William Hall, would also join them with some ‘*‘ Huddersfield chaps,” who would ‘bring Enoch ” and show them “ how to go on.” A solemn oath of secrecy was then adminis- tered to all present, and their names were taken down as they left the room by the vigi- lent watchmen who had kept guard at the door. * xe XK

The advice given by Brooke was carried out. The drivers of the waggons bringing Cartwright’s machines were met, as he sug- gested, on Hartshead Moor, and the frames were broken to pieces. It was not known that there was any organisation of Luddites in Liversedge and the machines were sent, as several had been sent to Cartwright’s mill before, simply in charge of the waggoners. They ought to have arrived before night, but the roads being very bad the progress of the vehicles had been much hindered, and darkness was closing in when they reached the Moor where the band was lying in ambush. The drivers, who were seized by a strong body of masked men, made no resistance, seeing it would be hopeless to do so, and suffered them- selves to be blindfolded and bound till the work of destruction was finished.