

https://ia803409.us.archive.org/16/items/writings-of-the-luddites/Writings%20of%20the%20Luddites.pdf


https://archive.org/details/cassellsillustra06lond/page/536/mode/2up?q=pentrich
Cassell's illustrated history of England
Publication date 1865
pp533-538

We must return from victory abroad to discontent at home. On the 28th of January the prince regent proceeded to open the fifth session of parliament. In his speech he expressed indignation at "the attempts which had been made to take advantage of the distresses of the country for the purpose of exciting a spirit of sedition and violence;" and he declared himself determined to put down these attempts by stern measures. The seconder of the address in the commons had the good sense to believe that the demagogues and their acts would die of themselves. Certainly, if the demagogues had no cause on which to base their efforts, those efforts must have proved fruitless; and the wisdom of government consisted in seriously inquiring whether there were such causes. To attempt to insure peace by smothering distress is the old remedy of tyrants, and is like heaping fuel on fire to put it out. Whilst this debate was proceeding, a message arrived from the lords to announce that the regent, on his return from the house, had been insulted, and some missile thrown through the windows of his carriage. The house agreed upon an address to the regent on this event, and then adjourned.

The next day the debate was resumed. It appeared that the prince had been hooted, and a stone, or something of the kind, flung through the window of the carriage. The ministerial party endeavoured to raise the occurrence into an attempt on the prince's life; the opposition hinted, as the expression of public disgust with the tone which government was assuming towards the distresses of the people, and called zealously for stringent reductions of expense, and they moved an amendment to that effect. But the government had yet much to learn on this head; and Lord Sidmouth announced that the prince regent in three days would send down a message on the disaffection of large masses of the people. It would have been wise to have added to this measure a recommendation of serious inquiry into the causes of this disaffection, for disaffection towards a government rarely exists without a sufficient cause; but the government had carried on matters so easily whilst they had nothing to do but to vote large sums of money for foreign war, and had been so much in co-operation with arbitrary monarchs, that they had acquired too much of the same spirit; and they now set about to put down the people of England as they, by the people of England, had put down Buonaparte. It was their plan to create alarm, and, under the influence of that alarm, to pass severe measures for the crippling of the constitution and the suppression of all complaints of political evil.

In the debate on this subject, George Canning, who on many occasions had shown himself capable of better things, breathed the very language of toryism. He declared the representation of parliament perfect, and treated the most moderate proposals for reform as only emanations from the mad theories of the Spenceans. The message of the prince regent came down on the 3rd of February, ordering certain papers to be laid before the house, "concerning certain practices, meetings, and combinations in the metropolis, and in different parts of the kingdom, evidently calculated to endanger the public tranquillity, to alienate the affections of his majesty's subjects from his majesty's person amnd government, and to bring into hatred and contempt the whole system of our laws and institutions." Lord Sidmouth endeavoured to guard the house of peers against the belief that tho insult to the regent had any share in the origination of this message, but the house of lords, in its address, directly charged this event as an additional proof of the public disaffection. So far as the prince regent was concerned, Machiavelli long before had described his mental condition, in that of "princes who, neglecting all virtuous actions, began to believe that they were exalted for no other purpose than to discriminate themselves from their subjects by their pomp, luxury, and all other effeminate qualities, by which means they fell into the hatred of their people, and, by consequence, that fear increasing, they began to meditate revenge." Unfortunately, the regent had two houses of parliament only too much disposed to make themselves the instruments of such vengeance. The message was referred to a secret committee in each house, and on the ISth and 19th of February they respectively made their reports. Both went at great length into the affair of the Spa Fields meeting, and the proceedings and designs of the Spcenceans were made to represent the designs of the working classes all over the kingdom; that such men as Thistlewood, who not long after suffered for his justly odious conduct, were conspicuous among the Spenceans, and that there had been an affray in Spa Fields were circumstances to give ample colouring to the reports of these committees. That of the lords stated — "It appears clear that the object is, by means of societies, or clubs, established, or to be established, in all parts of Great Britain, *under pretence of parliamentary reform*, to infest the minds of all classes of the community, and particularly of those whose situation most exposes them to such impressions, with a spirit of discontent and disaffection, of insubordination, and contempt of all law, religion, and morality; and to hold out to them the plunder of all property as the main object of their efforts, and the restoration of their natural rights; and no endeavours are omitted to prepare them to take up arms, on the first signal, for accomplishing their designs."

TO DO

The country societies were pointed out "as principally to be found in, and in the neighbourhood of Leicester, Loughborough, Nottingham, Mansfield, Derby, Chesterfield, Sheffield, Blackburn, JLanchester, Birmingham, Norwich, Glasgow, and its vicinity; but," it added, "they extend, and are spreading in some parts of tEe country, to almost every village." The report of the commouswent much over the same gi-ound, dwelhng particularly on the Hampden clubs, as avowed engines of revolution. It dwelt on the acta and activity of the leaders, of tho numbers which they had seduced and were, seducing, the oaths which bound them together, the means prepared for the forcible attainment of their objects, which were the overthrow of all rights of property and all the national institutions, to introduce a reign of general confusion, plunder, and anarchy.

Now, tho'ii_di in some obscure and ignorant parts of the country there were clubs which contemplated the foolkh idea of seizing u.i neighbouring projierties, the committees must have been very ill informed to have drawn any such conclusion as to the Hampden clubs, which were organiEed for

parliamentary reform, under tho auspices of Sir Francis Bur dott, major Cartwright, lord Cochrane, Cobbett, and others Most of these persons had large properties to be sacrificed by the propagation of any such principles, and the great topics of Cobbett "s "Register," the organ through which he communicated with the people, were the necessity of refraining from all violence, and of rising into influence by purely political co-operation. But these reports answered the purposes of the government, and they proceeded to intro ducc, and succeeded in passing four acts for the suppression of popular opinion. The first was to provide sever* punishment for all attempts to seduce the soldiers or sailors from their allegiance; the second to give further safeguards to the person of the sovereign, but did not include tho most eflectual of all — that of making him beloved; the third was to prevent seditious meetings, and gave great power to the magistrates and police to interfere with any meeting for the most mild reforms; the fourth was the old measure of sii.'pcnsion of the habeas corpus act, which armed the magistrates with the fearful authority to arrest and imprison at plea.sure, witliout being compelled to bi'ing the accused to trial. The last of the.se acts was not passed till the 29th of March, and it was to continue in force only till the 1st of July. But in the meantime events took place which occasioned its renewal.

Within a few days after the first passing of this act — that is, in the first week of March — a body of weavers, said by the government to amount to ten thousand men, but by a more competent authority, Samuel Bamford, the author of the "Life of a Radical," not to have exceeded four or five thousand, met in St. Peter's Field, at Manchester, and connnenced a march southward. The intention was to proceed to London, to present to the prince regent, in person, a petition describing their distress. Bamford had been consulted, and had condemned the project as wild, and likely to bring down nothing but trouble on the petitioners. Ho behoved that they were instigated by spies sent out by government, in order to find an opportunity of justifying their arbitrary measures. Susijicious persons had been trying him. But the poor, deluded people assembled, "many of them," says Bamford, "having blankets, rugs, or large coats rolled up, and tied knapsack-like on their backs. Some had paper.'^, supposed to be petitions, rolled up, and some had stout walking-sticks." From their blankets, they afterwards acquired the name of Blauketeers. The magistrates appeared and read the riot act, and dispersed the multitude by soldiers and constables; but three or four hundred fled in the direction of their intended route, and continued their march, pursued- by a body of yeomanry. By the time that they reached Macclesfield, at nine o'clock at night, they amounted to only one hundred and eighty; yet many of them persisted in proceeding, but they continually melted away, from hunger and from the misery of lying out in the fields on March nights. By the time that they reached Leek they were reduced to twenty, and six only were known to pass over the bridge at Ashbourn.

This was an attempt as constitutional as it was ignoranfly and hopelessly planned by suffering people; but mor,criminal speculations were on foot. A second report of the lords' secret committee, recommending the renewal of the

snapension of the habeas corpus act, stated that a general insurrection was planned to take place at Manchester, on the 30th of March— to seize the magistrates, to liberate the prisoners, burn the soldiers in their barracks, and set fire to a number of factories; and that siieh proposals were really in agitation is confirmed by Batnford, and other of the ladieal leaders. The report says that the design was discovered by the vigilance of the magistrates, a few days before its intended taking place; but it is far more probable that the magistrates had received some intimations of what was in progress from those who had misguided the ignorant


Ill III i-itude. Bamford tells us that both he and his friends had been applied to to engage in the design, but they had condemned it as the work of incendiaries, who had availed themselves of the resentment of the Blauketcers at their treatment, to instigate them to a dreadful revenge. The truth was, a number of spies in the pay of government, with the notorious Oliver at their lirad, were traversing the manufacturing districts of Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, Yorkshire, and Lancashire, to stimulate the suffering population into open insurrection, that they might be crushed by the military. Bamford

and the more enlightened workmen at once saw through the snare, and not only repulsed the tempters, but warned their fellows against their arts. The failure of the first attempt, however, did not put an end to the diaibolical attempt on the part of the spies. They recommended the most secret meetings for the purpose; that another night attnck should be prepared for Manchester, and that ministers should be assassinated. Such proposals were again made to Bamford and his friends, but they not only indignantly repelled them, but sought safety for their own persons in concealment, for there were now continual seizures of leading reformers made.

1

WILLIAM COBDErr. FROM AX AL'TUIiXTIC PORTRAIT.


Disappointed in this quarter, th._' odious race of inceaJiary spies of government tried their arts, and succeeded in duping some individuals in Yorkshire, and many more in Derbyshire. That the principal governinent spy, Oliver, xn busily engaged in this work of stirring up the ignorant and sufl'ering poptdation to open insurrection from the 17th of April to the 7th of June, when such an outbreak took place in Derbyshire, we hive the most complete evidence. Immediately after this unhappy outbreak, on the tOth of June, we have Mr. Ponsonby making remarkable statements. It

was on the 23rd of June, on the debate for renewing the suspension of the habeas corpus act, that he maile them. He had been a member of the secret committee, but liad strongly dissented from the opinions of the majority of the committee as to the necessity of the renewal of the suspension, he remarked that Nottinghanishire and Leicestershire had for some years been agitated by violent prejudices against the use of machinery, and that men assembling under the name of Luddites, or followers of Ned Ludd, had repeatedly committed nocturnal acts of such destruction. These proceedings, he properly stated, had no political character whatever, as was fully shown on the trials of eight of the Luddites, at the spring assizes at Leicester, of whom six were convicted of such outrages at Loughborough, and hanged. But it pointed out to government that the materials of insuirectiou existed in the Midland Counties, if they were duly excited. And here the arch instigator comes to light! This Mr. Oliver had been examined before the secret committee, and the account which he gave of his proceedings was this: he represented that a man, calling himself a delegate, had come up to London to seek the sympatliy and co-operation of the London agitators; that this man had received no cucouragemont from the reformers, but had met with tsvo persons ready to go down with him into the Midland Counties, and to these three Oliver had joined himself as a fourth delegate. This is Mr. Ponsonby's statement: "Before they proceeded on their journey, Oliver was in communication with the home office, but received no instructions to compromise the safety of any one, by tempting them with practices which he afterwards exposed. The co-delegates fully relied on Oliver; the country delegate introduced him to all his friends as a second self. Oliver remained amongst these people from the 17th of April to the 27th of Jlay, everywhere received as the London delegate. He was examined before the secret committee, and told tliem he was very shy of giving information. What he said was, that London was ready to rise, and only wished to know what assistance could be derived from the country. His friend the country delegate gave effect to this information, by telling his brethren the country delegates that seventy- five thousand individuals could be relied on in the eastern part of the capital, and scvcnty-five thousand in the western."

There ended Jlr. Ponsonby's disclosures; but Oliver was attending a meeting of delegates at Thornhill-lees, near Dewsbury, in Yorkshire, on the 6th of June. He was arrested, with nine others, but he was at large the same evening in Wakefield. It then came out, from a servant of Sir John Byng, commander of the forces in that district, that Oliver had previously been in communication with Sir John, and no doubt obtained his immediate liberation from him on the safe netting of his nine victims. In fact, in a letter from this Sir John Byng (theu lord Stratford), in 1846, to the dean of Norwich, he candidly admits that he had received orders from lord Sidmouth to assist the operations of Oliver, who was, his lordship said, going down into that part of the country where meetings were being frequently held, and that Oliver, who carried a letter to Sir John, was to give him all the information that he could, so that he might prevent such meetings. Here, as well as

from other sources, we are assured that Oliver only receired authority to collect information of the proceeding's of the conspirators, and by no means to incite them to illegal acts. We have ako the asnirance of Mr. Louis Allsop, a distinguished solicitor of Nottingliam, that Oliver was in communication with him on the 7th of June, immediately on his return from Yorkshire, and informed liim that a meeting was the same evening to take place in Nottingliam, and that he and another gentleman strongly urged him to attend it, which Oliver did. Mr. Allsop says that Oliver had no instructions to incite, but only to collect information. All this has been industriously put forward to excuse ministers. But what are the facts? We find Oliver not only — according to evidence which came out on the trials of the unfortunate dupes at Derby — directly stimulating the simple people to insurrection, but joining in deluding them into the persuasion thiit all Loudon was ready to rise, and that one hundred and fifty thousand from the east and west of the capital only waited for them. We find him not only disseminating these ideas throughout these districts from the 17th of April to the 27th of May, but also to have concerted a simultaneous rising in Yorkshire, at Nottingham, and in Derbyshire, on the 6th of June. Thornhill-lees, in Yorkshire, was on the verge of action, and ten delegates, including Oliver himself, were arrested. In Derbyshire the insurrection actually took place. Yet what did these gentlemen, who bear testimony to the innocent instructions of ministers, to Oliver? They knew that he had incited the people to rise, and they none of them, except the magistrates at Dewsbury, attempted to prevent the rising, by making use of Oliver's information and arresting the ringleaders. And then for the ministers, and especially lord Sidmouth, from whom this incendiary directly proceeded: when they came fully to know to what lengths he had gone — when a great number of most simple, ignorant men had been led into outbreak, and many were transported and several were executed for following his suggestions — did they renounce and denounce him? On the contrary, there is every reason to believe that he was richly rewarded, and sent into the colonies, out of the reach of the vengeance and the odium which awaited him in England. These facts are sufficient to lay the burden of the guilt of these dark doings on the true shoulders.

What immediately follows shows that Oliver had planned and brought to a crisis, by his personal exertions, this unhapjiy rising. On Sunday, the 8th of June, Jeremiah Brandreth, a framework-knitter of Nottingham, appeared, with some others, at a public-house, called the White Horse, in the village of Pentrich, in Derbyshire. This village is about fourteen miles from Nottingham, and about a mile from the small market town of Ripley. It is in a district of coal and iron mines, and is near the large iron foundry of Butterley. The working people of the village, and of the neighbouring village of South Wingfield, are chiefly colliers, workers in the iron mines or iron foundry, or agricultural labourere — a race little informed at that day, and therefore capable of being readily imposed on. This Brandreth had been known for years as a fiery agitator. He was a little, dark-haired man, of perhaps thirty years of age. He had been much with Oliver, and was one of his most thoroxigk
ilupes, ready for the commission of any desperate deed. He had acquired the cognomen of the "Nottingham captain," and now appeared in an old brown great-coat, with a gun in his hand, and a pistol thrust into an apron, which was rolled round his waist as a belt.

Two of the workmen from Butterley Foundry enterefl the AV'hitc Horse, which was kept by a widow Wightman, whoso sou George was deep in the foolish conspiracy into which Oliver and this his blind, savage tool, the Nottingham captain, were leading him. They found Brandrcth with a map before him, and telling them there was no good to be done, they must march up to London and overthrow the government. He said all the country was rising; that at Nottingham the people had already taken the castle and seized the soldiers in their barracks, and were waiting for them. This shows that he had come straight from Oliver, who, on the 7th, was at Nottingham, attending the meeting there, and who knew that the meeting in Yorkshire had been prevented. Yet he had allowed the people of Nottingham to believe that the Yorksliire men were coming, according to agreement, in thousands; and he allowed Brandreth to go and arouse Derbyshire, under the belief that Nottingham that night would be in the hands of the insurgents. So Brandreth was telling these simple villagers that "all the country was to rise at one time — that England, France, and Ireland would rise that night at ten o'clock, and the men of Yorkshire were already coming down in clouds, and would carry all before them." Such was the mad absurdity with which Oliver had filled the ears and the minds of his ignorant victims. Brandreth told these poor fellows that at Nottingham every man would receive a hundred guineas, and then — such was his knowledge of geography, though he ba.l a map in his hand — "they would go down the Trent in boats; and it would be only a journey of pleasure to London."

He then ordered a barrel of gunpowder in, and proceeded to show those present how to make cartridges, repeating some doggerel verses which had been widely circulated, beginning —

"Every man his luck must try; He must turn out, and not denj'; No bloody soldier must he dread; He must turn out, and fight for bread."

They then separated, agreeing to meet again on the morrow after dark. The two men from Butterley Foundry, though special constables, were too much intimidated to mention the matter to their employers. On Monday night, the 9 th of June, Brandreth and a knot of his colleagues proceeded to muster their troop of insurgents for the march to Nottingham. They roused up the men in their cottage.?, and, if they refused to go, they broke in the doors with a crowbar, and compelled them to join them. Most of these unwilling levies slipped away in the dark on the first opportunity. At South Wingfield he assembled his forces in an old barn, and then they proceeded through the neighbourhood demanding men and guns. An old woman had the courage to tap the "captain" on the shoulder, and say— "My lad, i\'e have a magistrate here;" and many of the men thought Brandreth must be mad or drunk. At the farm of widow Hetheriuton he demanded her men and arms, and when she

stoutly refused him, he put the gun through the window and shot one of her men dead.

As the day dawned, Brandreth and his infatuated troop appeared before the gates of Butterley Foundry, and demanded the men; but Mr. Goodwin, the manager, had been apprised of their approach, and had closed the gates. Brandreth had planned to take Butterley Foundry, and carry away not only the men but a sm.iU cannon kept there; but Mr. Goodwin went out and told Brandreth he should not have a man for any such in.sane purpose, and seeing an old man that he well knew, Isaac Ludlam, who bore a good character, and had been a local preacher amongst the Jlethodists, he seized him by the collar, and pushed him into the foundry court, telling him not to be a fool, but stay at home. Ludlam, however, replied, "he was as bad as he could be," rushed out, and went on — to his death; for he was one of those executed.

All this time it was raining heavily, and Brandreth, daunted by the weather, or by the courageous conduct of the manager, gave the word to march. The manager calculated that there were only about rt hundred of them at this point; but they were soon after jiiini.d by another troop from Ripley, and they took two roads, which united about three miles farther on, collecting fresh men by the most direful threats. When they reached Eastwood, a village three or four miles farther on the road to Nottingham, they were said to amount to three hundred, but ragged, famished, drenched with the rain, and not half of them armed, even with rude pikes. Such was the army intended to overturn the government of England! Near Eastwood they wero met by a troop of horse from Nottingham, which had been summoned by Mr. Rolleston, a magistrate, and at the sight they fled in confusion. About forty guus and a number of pikes were picked up, and a considerable number of prisoners were made, amongst them Brandreth. These prisoners were afterwards tried at a special assize at Derby. They were defended by Thomas, afterwards Lord Denman, whose eloquence on the occasion raised him at once into notice, and whose generous, gratuitous, and indefatigable exertions on behalf of these simple, ignorant victims of government instigation, showed him to be a man of the noblest nature. Notwithstanding his efforts, twenty of these unhappy dupes were transported for different terras, and three — Brandreth, Ludlam, and Turner — were hanged and then beheaded as traitors.

Bamford — who had himself been, in the meantime, arrested at Jliddleton, in Lancashire, and conveyed to London with a number of others, where he was five times examined by the privy council, and by lord Sidmouth himself, but, no charge being proved against hiui, was discharged on the 30th of April— gives us, in his "Life of a Radical," a curioua proof of the extensive operations of Oliver. Scarcely had he returned honie when he found the tempter busy in that quarter. Joseph Mitchell, an old arquaintance, and a stranger were going about pkuining meetings, and one day an old man, who had been a delegate from Derby to London, where he had himself gone up in that character firom Middleton, came to him with a young man looking like a weaver, .-ind informed him that :i inoplinu' was about to take place ui loitaliue, which would give a cruishng blow to

he borough-mongers. CamforJ gave tliem a very cold reception, and advised the old man to let those things alone, but "he huffed at the advice." This old man was Tliomas Bacon, one of the very men engaged with Brandreth at Pentrich, and wlio was transported for life; the young man with him was William Turner, one of the three executed at Derby; "and," adds Bamford, emphatically, "the struiiyer whom Joseph Mitchell had so industriously introduced amongst the discontented classes of Lancashire, Yorkshire, and Derbyshire, who first inveigled them into treasonable associations, then to armed insurrections, and then betrayed them — that stianger, that betrayer, reader, was Oliver, the spy!"

Such were the moans employed by the British government in 1817 to quieten the country under its distress — a distress the inevitable result of the long and stupendous war carried on for the restoration of foreign despotic monarchs. No feeling of commiseration seems to have existed in the bosoms of ministers for the miseries of the millions thus plunged into destitution by the reckless expenditure for these un-English wars. The only idea was to tighten the reins of government — to stimulate the sufferers into overt acts, and then crush them. Fortunately — with the exception of the Derby juries, who were chiefly farmers out of the Peak, who came from the sowing of their turnips ignorant of politics as the cattle on their hills, and were alarmed into severity by the florid harangues of the attorney-general on plots, and seditions, and traitors — the juries in general saw through the miserable farce of rebelhou, and discharged the greater part of Oliver's and lord Sidmouth's victims. Watson was acquitted of high treason in London on the ICth of June, less than a week after the Derbyshire insurrection. His son had eluded the pursuit of the police. Seventeen prisoners on the like charges were liberated in July in Glasgow and Edinburgh, and were paid seven shillings each to carry them home. Ou the 22nd of August, of the twenty-four persons that Oliver had entrapped in Yorkshire, twenty-two were discharged — against eleven of them no bills being found by the grand jury — and the two left in prison were detained there because, under the suppression of the habeas corpus act, they were not brought up for trial. The Manchester Blanketeers were, in like manner, all discharged, though the duke of Northumberland did his utmost to stimulate lord Sidmouth to get them punished; his grace seeing in their miserable march a resemblance to the march of the armed and desperate MarseUois to Paris, in the early days of the French revolution. On the country at large, the impression was that the government had propagated a most needless alarm, and that those who had fallen on the scaffold had been exalted by them from poor, ignorant labourers into burlesque traitors, through the execrable agency of their incendiaries, Oliver, Castles, Mitchell, and others.

But the government had to receive another lesson this year on the folly of endeavouring, in the nineteenth centmy, to crush the liberties of Englishmen. There was an organ called the Press, which, neither partaking the governmental fears of a necessary complaint by the pubhc of the evils which preyed upon it, nor the governmental hopes of silencing the sufT'rers without any attempt to mitigate their

calamities, reported freely the mingled folly and cruelty cf ministers, and called for the only remedy of the country's misfortunes — reform. The government and its supporters then turned on this troublesome engine. It was a foolisli act, for that iron-man represented by Spenser in his "Fairy Queen" by the name of Talus, had broken the heads and prostrated the efforts of much abler men on many a former occasion. On moving the second reading ol the bill for the suspension of the habeas corpus act, lord Sidmouth observed that some noble lords had complained that the authors and publishers of infamous libels on the government were not prosecuted. He assured them that the government were quite aa anxious as these noble lords to punish the offenders, but that the law ofEcers of the crown were greatly puzzled in their attempts to deal with them; that authors had now become so skilful from experience, that the diffieulties of convicting them exceeded those of any former time.

It would seem that the law officers of the crown despaired of proceeding in the old way, but they, or the ministers themselves, hit on a new and inore daring one. On the 27th of March the secretary of state addressed a circular letter to the lords-lieutenant of counties, informing them that the law officers were of opinion that a justice of the peace may issue warrants to apprehend persons charged with the publication of political libels, and compel them to give bail; and he required the lords-lieutenant to communicate this opinion to the ensuing quarter sessions, that all magistrates might act upon it. This was the most daring attack on the liberty of the subject which had been made in England since the days of the Stuarts. There was not a man now living in the kingdom who might not, under the operation of the habeas corpus suspension act, at any moment, be dragged from his family and business, and lodged in a dungeon, without power of compelling the magistrates to bring him to trial. And now this law was particularly directed against the proprietors of the press. Not a syllable could be uttered that ministers might deem offensive, without the utterer of it being liable to be arrested and imprisoned, and the action of his press stopped. It was truly called a "gagging" measure. Thus was the whole race of ignorant and hot-headed country justices, who knew little beyond dogs and horses, made the judges of all the subtleties and deUcacies of literature , and even a well-affected poet like Coleridge, humming his verses ou the Qiiantoc Hills, was put into jeopardy by one of them. Lord Grey, on the 12th of May, made a most zealous and able speech in the house of lords against this proceeding, denouncing the investment of justices of the peace with the power to decide beforehand questions which might puzzle the acutest juries, an 1 to arrest and imprison for what might turn out to be no offence at all. He said:— "If such be the power of the magistrate, and if this be the law, where, I ask, are all the boasted securities of our independence and freedom?"




https://archive.org/details/memorialsofoldde00coxjuoft
Memorials of old Derbyshire
by Cox, J. Charles (John Charles), 1843-1919

Publication date 1907

p35-7

TO DO

To this county belongs the discredit of being the last place in the provinces where that horrible medley of butchery and torture — "hung, drawn, and quartered" — which our forefathers invented as a penalty for high treason, was carried out, although happily in a somewhat modified form. The actually last instance occurred in 1820, when the five Cato Street conspirators were beheaded after being hung. This shocking form of death fell to the lot of a Derbyshire framework knitter and two stonemasons in 1817. This was the time when the distress amongst the working classes in the Midlands had come to a climax, when every project of constitutional reform was stifled, and when a few half-starved men, deliberately incited by the spies and informers of those in authority, planned an abjectly foolish but riotous and murderous scheme to obtain relief, which was hatched at the "White Horse" Inn, Pentrich. The two or three score of labourers who took part in this rising were almost instantly scattered by the yeomanry; but the policy of the Government seems to have been to use this instrument

to terrify the populace at large, and thereby to crush all attempts at reform. Hence everything was done that could be to exaggerate the so-called rebellion, and although the misguided ringleaders richly deserved punishment at the hands of the ordinary authority, it seems monstrous to have charged the offenders with high treason, and with the crime of levying war against the King. However, a special commission of four judges was appointed, and the trials at Derby, which extended over ten days, began on 1 5th of October. Most of the forty-six prisoners were condemned to transportation, but three of the ringleaders, James Brandreth, William Turner, and Isaac Ludlam, received the capital sentence for high treason. The prince regent signed the warrant for the execution of these three "traitors," drawn from the humblest station in life, remitting that part of the sentence which related to "quartering," with other absolutely unspeakable details, but ordering the hanging, drawing, and beheading. Two axes were ordered of Bamford, a smith of Derby, the pattern being taken from one in the Tower, which was supposed to have served in like cases.

On the morning of Friday, the seventh of November, the three miserable men, heavily ironed, were jolted round the prison yard on a horse-drawn hurdle or sledge, prepared, like the block, by Finney, the town joiner. On mounting the scaffold in front of the county jail, Brandreth and his fellows briefly testified that they had been brought to this plight by the tempting of Oliver, the degraded Government spy. They hung from the gallows for half an hour. Brandreth's body was the first taken down and placed on the block. The greatest difficulty had been experienced in finding an executioner, but at last the high fee of twenty-five guineas secured several applicants. The chosen headsman was a Derbyshire collier; he was masked, and his identity was never disclosed. The mutilation was bungled; but when accomplished, the executioner seized the head by the hair, and holding it

at arm's length in three different directions over the crowd, thrice proclaimed, "Behold the head of the traitor Jeremiah Brandreth." The other two were served in like manner. The scaffold was surrounded by a strong force of cavalry with drawn swords, and several companies of infantry were also present The dense crowd was quite over-awed, and could utter no other protest than "terrifying shrieks."

In that crowd was the poet Shelley. The day before the execution, the Princess Charlotte died in childbirth, and Shelley seized the opportunity to write a vigorous and now most rare pamphlet drawing a contrast between che two deaths.

The block on which these three men were beheaded is still preserved in the new county gaol at Derby. It consists of two 2| in. planks fastened together, and measures 6 ft. 6 in. by 2 ft. Six inches from one end a piece of wood 3 in. high is nailed across. The whole is tarred over, but the wood, strangely enough, remains damp in places. A tradition used to be current that the block sweated every seventh of November, on the anniversary of the execution; the writer visited it on that day in 1888, and found no difference in the sweating to what he had noticed in the previous week.

---

https://archive.org/details/gentlemansmagaz376unkngoog/page/322/mode/2up?q=pentrich
The Gentleman's magazine
VOL. CCLXXXIX. NO. 2

September 1900

pp323-335

THE LAST ENGLISH REBELLION.

THE first two decades of the nineteenth century are a record of continual riot and disaffection. The exhausting effects of the long foreign wars had fostered a spirit of domestic discontent The land was weary. Moreover, the working class was suffering under an additional stress — the competition of new steam-power inventions. The hard-faring peasant had been taught through centuries of experience to bear with quiet sullenness the vicissitudes of his lot; but the artisan and millworker hotly resented the advent of the New Force which threatened to drive him out of existence. The weaver, as Luddite and Plug-destroyer and what not, was waging desperate war against a relentless adversary which, eating no bread, threatened to deprive him of the last crumb of his already small loaf.

In this critical state of the social economy the Government seemed powerless. It could disperse mobs and prosecute disorderly persons, but it had no preventive remedy. The steam-engine was a hard fact: it boded extinction to the hard worker, and the "hand," gleaning no spark of reassurance or encouragement from the alarmed powers that be, turned "bersark," there being so little to choose between the board and lodging of the gaol and that of the poor-house. So the authorities were face to face with the pitiful fact that ordinary punishment added no suffering to the everyday misery of the wretched delinquent.


TO DO

In this state of public affairs it was determined to quiet the country by what was termed "making examples." It was a vague, blundering resolve, bred of the uncertainty of the times— a hitting out all round in the dark. "If these rioters, or a few of them, can by the jugglery of the law be adjudged traitors, we will offer a sacrifice that the land may have rest," reasoned the advisers of the Prince Regent. But a real traitor was a scarce article; murders and other hanging matters were, alas! of plentiful occurrence, but rioting, though a breach of the King's peace, was not an offence against the King's person or power. The fismiished mobs which sacked factories and destroyed spinning jennies neither usurped the regal authority nor threatened the throne.

The emissaries of the Government, however, set about their task as best they could. Do not let us judge harshly. It is only in accordance with the facts to assert that the prime authorities were honestly convinced that treason was abroad: it is but natural to suppose that the executive would be warned to be on the qui vive for treasonable acts; the executive, moreover, would require the assistance of subordinates, and so in the process of delq;ation would come into existence a body of spies and secret informers.

One of the latter class was a man named Oliver. The movements of this person came to be noticed in the month of May 1817, when he was actively engaged among the Yorkshire workers, where his operations culminated in a trade riot at Thomhill Lees, near Dewsbury, on June 8. Oliver was arrested, along with several of the ringleaders, but almost immediately set at liberty, without magisterial enquiry. What became of the others we need not enquire; he at any rate deemed it prudent to quietly disappear from the neighbourhood. But in the meantime he had made the acquaintance of a Derbyshire countryman named Bacon, whose kinswoman kept the White Horse Inn at Pentrich, a village which will be referred to later on. Bacon, under the tutelage of the crafty Oliver, soon became an attached adherent of the disaffected party, and the effects of this acquaintanceship had far-reaching and most unfortunate effects.

Whilst the Dewsbury riot was in process of hatching, Oliver, after a visit to London, made an excursion to Nottingham, arriving there on the morning of May 26 in company with a Mr. Biricin, by whom he was introduced to several men as the "London delegate." One of these was Jeremiah Brandreth. The same evening a consultation took place between Oliver and the men in a private room of the Three Salmons. What transpired at this meeting is deposed to by various and opposite parties. Oliver, while admitting that he was there as a spy, privately declared that he never directly encouraged by word or deed any outbreak against law and order. On the other hand, it is specifically allied by more than one of those present that Oliver was the main speaker, and that he was the author of those fanciful delusions which proved the ruin of the Derbyshire "rebels."

The scene changes, and time has progressed somewhat One morning, some three weeks after the Nottingham meeting, or, to be precise, on Sunday morning, June 8, the White Horse Inn, Pentrich, was the scene of a memorable gathering. Nanny Weightman's public-house was abnormally busy, and, as the

foundrymen from Butterly Furnace and others strolled in, Nanny herself briskly invited them into the bar-room. The licensing laws of that day did not enforce Sunday closing, so there was no breach of privilege in having her premises open at 10 o'clock on the Sabbath mom, though, strictly speaking, we believe the churchwardens or constable should have seen that all inns were closed during the hours of divine service.

This, however, is only a detail: matters of deeper importance than a breach of the Innkeepers' Acts were being discussed in the bar pariour of the White Horse. Nanny Weightman, poor soul, was jubilant, thrilling with the same glorious expectations which had so uplifted Zebedee's wife; for her son George, a tall, striding young man with a fine red £Eu:e, and her kinsman Bacon, were destined to be the chief men in that better England which was coming "in the days of pretty soon."

Pentrich, we may mention, is a small East Derbyshire village, in the coal and iron-stone part of the county. In its neighbourhood were the Butterly Ironworks, which employed such of the men as were not engaged in agriculture. Wingfield, with its ancient manor house, lies close by, and the old market town of Chesterfield, crowned with its fietmous crooked spire and threaded with its equally crooked lanes and alleys, is the metropolis of the locality.

The object of this Sunday conference was nothing less than the overthrow of the British Constitution. It may be noted as a curious circumstance that treason seems to have "stalked" pretty freely and frequently in this district Anthony Babington, the young Elizabethan plotter (whose end was the scaffold) was of Wingfield Manor; likewise the first Duke of Devonshire and his fellow patriots held secret meeting in the old Revolution House, near Chesterfield, the outcome of which was the "Sacred Revolution" of 168S.

Around the smoke-room mahogany of the White Horse there sat Jeremiah Brandreth (whose acquaintance the reader has already made, and who, by-the-bye, was a frame-work knitter by occupation); William Turner, stonemason; Isaac Ludlam, a carter; and Nanny Weightman's George. These were the destined leaders and organisers of a new party, which was to provide a larger loaf for the working man, and to inaugurate a millennium of cakes and ale. Brandreth, or, as he was called, the Nottingham Captain, was a stranger to the Pentrich villagers. He represented himself as coming from ''headquarters" to take charge of the local contingent, and conduct them to Nottingham Forest. Brandreth is an enigma. He had been heard of once before, viz. at the Three Salmons


meeting, but nothing ever transpired afterwards as to the dicumstances which led to his ill-£Eited appointment The same uncertainty surrounds his personal history. It has been said that he came from Exeter, and had at one time been a seaman: he was a short-statured, grim-visaged person, clad in the garb of the working class, but a man of some intelligence and education, and of considerable natmal powers — a rude leader of men. This Sunday morning he was mifolding to his colleagues and to all and sundry who called at the "White Horse" his scheme for deposing the Govemment Ljrii^opeci in front of him was a map of England, "with canvas at the bade of it and crosses upon it so as to find out places." The teniM* of his mission was expressed in some doggerel which he recited, beginning:—

Every man his skill must try,  
He must turn out and not deny;  
No bloody soldier must he drnd,

He must turn out and fight for bread;

The time must come, you plainly see

The Government c^yposed must be.

He mformed his audience that great events would shortly come to pass, and especially emphasised the assurance that the country was only waiting for the Pentrich men to take the initiative.

After much arrangement and scheming, which lasted until the afternoon, the main plan was sketched out as follows. Such a force as was aheady prepared to act were to assemble at a given time at South Wingfield, which is a mile or so from Pentrich: they were to march thence, through Pentrich on to Butterly Ironworks, where a halt was to be made, it being anticipated that the ironworicers would join them. The furnace works were to be taken possession of and the cannons understood to be kept there seized. The works were to be garrisoned as a base for the supply of offensive weapons. The march was then to be continued through certain towns and villages to Nottingham Forest, a distance of about fourteen miles. A list of persons known to have guns was drawn iqi, and these people were to be raided and their weapons appropriated by the insurgents. Moreover, it was resolved that a barrel of gunpowder should be procured, and bullets were to be provided as required by stripping the lead from church roofs on the line of route. Those improvided with guns were to be armed with pikes (or "spikes," as these desperate folks called them).

Such was the crazy scheme, and it appears to have met with the full approval of most of Nanny Weightman's customers. Brandreth

nformed his adherents that by the time they reached Nottingham London would have £Edlen into the hands of the new party, and a fresh Government, which purposed first of all to wipe off the National Debt, would be in power. A "cloud from the North" — the rebels of Lancashire and Yorkshire — were to follow in the wake of the devastating hosts of Pentrichand Wingfield, to eat up the remnant of the land and complete the destruction of the well-to-do. Nottingham was to be their goal, and Nottingham was to be a second Capuse, a place of unlimited rations, "rum for every man and a hundred guineas apiece." It was a promise of fulness, almost too rosy to be true; but the Obtain disarmed all suspicion by arranging for old Geoige Weightman, who possessed everybody's confidence, to proceed on foot to Nottingham and ascertain for himself the state of af&irs — a collection being made in the room to pay his expenses. George was ordered to return the next day, and all parties were to assemble at Hunt's Bam, in Wingfield, by dark on Monday evening, to make final preparations.

Monday night found the neighbourhood in a great stir. Men were openly making their way to the rendezvous, not however with the stem, set &ces common to those who are about to do or die, but rather in a disposition of grinning good-humour. Everybody in the place seemed to be aware of this fomous shindy, and there was no aid of hilarity as neighbours met and chaffed with one another. The authorities, however, were not asleep, although little open activity on their part was apparent. Perhaps it would have been more honest if they had exercised their authority at the outset.

The gathering at Hunt's Bam numbered about two score, including Brandreth, Turner, and the other ringleaders. There was some more speech-making. England, Ireland, and France were to rise simultaneously at ten o'clock that night; consequently the highest spirits prevailed among the rebels. William Turner, the young stonemason, was appointed lieutenant to Brandreth, as being the leading Wingfield insurgent and as having special knowledge where guns were to be found. So fiar the party only boasted of two or three firearms, the rest carrying eight-foot pikes, rudely barbed with iron: these latter had been made and secreted in Hunt's Bam some time beforehand.

It is pretty certain that this gang of misguided villagers never realised the consequences when they thus sallied forth with weapons in their hands. The Nottingham Captain amused them with his strange talk: he had doubtless also paid for a good deal of ale the day previous, and would very likely pay for some more, and — well

— if his wonderful predictions did not come to pass, it was only a night's spree which would vary the monotony of their hard lot As for Brandreth himself, we repeat he is an enigma; what he thought or believed nobody can telL

The first anxiety was to increase the slender fighting force and to collect firearms, because even these bonny fighters realised that two score men without arms could neither sack a town nor violently overturn a government So a house to house call was made Most of the farmers had gone to bed, and the insurrectionists had to make a terrific uproar to waken them up. When the good man had been brought to the house door or the chamber window, the argle-bargling would begin — the gun had gone to be mended, or it was out of order, or there was no gun. Sometimes it was a man who was commandeered — a feurmer's son or a £Eurm hand. Then there would be half angry, half jocular protestations, and the unwillmg conscript would either be persuaded to join, or, if very obstinate, he would be allowed to go to bed again. If he joined the rebel standard he was provisionally armed with a "spike" Or a pitchfork. Brandreth was the only one who conducted himsdf seriously, and it was he who perpetrated one act of unquestionable crime. Towards eleven o'clock Mrs. Hepworth's farmhouse was raided. This woman, together with her two daughters, a son, and two men servants, were aroused by noises all round the house. The gun was demanded, and at the same time a shot fired by the Captain struck and mortally wounded one of the servants. This violent act sobered the party, and one of them remonstrated with the leader for the murder of "that poor innocent lad." Brandreth desperately ordered his followers to hold their peace, and threatened to serve some of them the same. About this time another scout — young Weightman— was sent forward on a pony to Nottingham to reconnoitre.

After collecting as many men and arms in Wingfield and Pentrich as was considered expedient, Brandreth proceeded, with the help of one Swaine, a militiaman, to form his band into military array. By this time they numbered about one hundred. The next and most important move was to obtain possession of Butterly Ironworks — situate about one-and-a-half miles distant — and to enlist as many of the workers as possible for the purpose of manufacturing weapons. Butterly had, however, made special preparation for the visit: nearly one hundred special constables had been hurriedly sworn in, and this loyal force, under the charge of Geoige Goodwin, was quartered in the buildings. Just after daybreak the garrison.



having remained unmolested all night, concluded that the disturbance had settled, and dispersed to their homes, leaving only twenty-five pikemen with Mr. Goodwin. Unfortunately, their surmise proved incorrect, for between three and four o'clock on the Tuesday morning Brandreth and his party made their appearance on the Pentrich road. Rain had fallen in torrents during the first hours of the morning, and, impervious as the Derbyshire native may be to the effects of bad weather, it must nevertheless have been daunting and dispiriting to the rebels at this time. The Captain marched his men right on to the gates of Butterly, and lined them up in front He then approached the gates, and, knocking at them with the butt end of his gun, called on the defenders to surrender. Mr. Goodwin, the manager, has described the redoubtable Brandreth as he appeared on this interesting occasion: "He gave the command to 'Right face, front!' He had a gun in his hand and a pistol in his belt, which looked like an apron twisted round him." "?? Standing by him were his lieutenants, "?? Isaac Ludlam the elder with a spear, James Taylor with a gun, and Isaac Moore with a fork." Mr. Goodwin came forward to parley, but not to capitulate. He administered to Brandreth and his foUowers a sound lecture, and ordered them to begone—which they did, taking the main road to Derby. The honours of war lay entirely with the besi^ed, and Mr. Goodwin with his own hands captured one prisoner, who had concealed imder his smock-frock a bag containing eighty-four pounds of bullets 1 Verily the satisfaction of that disburdened warrior must have been akin to that of Charles Churchill when he lost both his surplice and wife. "I feel," said the spendthrift poet, "in the

situation of a man who has carried a d d heavy load a long way,

and then sets it down."

The party marched on to Ripley, where they halted and gave "three huzzas to guide the men from Heage and Belper," who were to meet them there. Then they pushed on toCodnor, where they knocked up the landlord of the Glass House Inn. Here, ale to the value of twenty-eight shillings was consumed, Brandreth informing mine host that the shot would be paid later on by the "provisional government" The night had been wretchedly wet, and the attempt on Butterly Ironworks had ended in a foolish fiasco. Some of the rebels had abeady sneaked away when the Captain's eye was not upon them, flinging their pikes into the nettle-beds on the wayside: the remainder, with drenched smock-frocks clinging round their legs, thought the spree had been carried far enough, and that they had better get back home again in time for work. The good cheer of the Glass

House had failed to impart to the situation a brighter complexion, and it was now as much as the leaders could do to prevent a general disbandment of the forces. At Langley they fell in with George Weightman, returning from Nottingham, whither he had been despatched early in the night Weightman, resolute to the last, answered the eager enquiries of his comrades with an improbable lie, grossly transparent even to those who had already swallowed so much. "All is right, my lads," he assured them; "you have nothing to do but march on: they bombarded Nottingham at two o'clock thb morning, and it is given up to them." At the command of the Captain they again doggedly put forward, but desertions became more frequent, and at Eastwood, a mile or two further on, report came that the Yeomanry were in the neighbourhood. That intelligence practically ended the matter. Brandreth's army instantly ceased to exist Directly afterwards fifteen Hussars came in sights and the magistrate who accompanied them testified that he saw &om a distance the rustic battalion "still formed," but when he arrived at the place he found only a few guns and pikes.

Such was the termination of the last English Rebellion.

The termination, did we say? No, alas! it was but the beginning. The cunning beaters had only just started the two-and-sixpenny hare: the field, with its hundred guinea steeds, and riders of priceless reputation and importance, had yet to steeplechase over miles of country, at much risk, ere the quarry could, by any code of sportsman's law, receive its despatch.

For some weeks following the memorable 9th of June, the military and constabulary were busily employed in pursuit of the fugitives. Many of them were captured in the immediate neighbourhood, but a few had gone farther afield and were more troublesome to find. In the meantime public opinion throughout the country was more than a little exercised over the matter. The policy of the Government and of the Government organs was to magnify the importance of the "revolt," and to gravely enlarge upon its potentialities. It had cost the party not a little to engineer this rebellion, and, poor though it might be, they were determined to make it serve its purpose as "an example." So the pikes and smock-frocks were overlooked, and the Pentrich and Wingfield clodhoppers given a noble run for their money. They were to be tried for treason "intended to deprive and depose our Lord the King of and from the style, honor and kingly name of the Imperial Crown of this Realm." The Opposition, of course, was loud in its ridicule of such a proceeding, denouncing it as


a piece of political bluster. A special commission of four of His Majesty's Judges was appointed to try the valiant besiegers of Butterly Ironworks, one of whom was Sir Charles Abbot (afterwards Lord Tenterden).

Thursday, September 25, was the opening day, and great were the preparations made at the county town of Derby. Besides javelin men, no fewer than two hundred burgesses were made special constables, and these, together with a body of Yeomanry and the principal gentry of the neighbourhood, formed a cavalcade which set forward, headed by the Sheriff, to meet the Judges' coach from London. Their lordships were escorted in solemn state to the County Hall, and subsequently adjourned to attend a sumptuous repast provided in honour of the occasion. Next morning the Court assembled for business. Twelve prisoners, brought from Nottingham under an escort of the isth Light Dragoons, were placed in the dock, with seven others (including Brandreth) who had been confined in Derby gaol. Their solicitors, in accordance with the usual formality, made application for counsel, and Mr. Cross and Mr. Denman were assigned for the defence. This business terminated the sitting.

On the evening of October 14— three weeks after the first brief meeting of the Court — the ancient capital of the Peak County again showed great and unmistakable signs of activity. The streets were thronged with a crowd variously composed of fine gentlemen, burly formers, and roughly-clad workers. All sorts and conditions of men were requisitioned to assist at the great inquiry. Lodgings were at a premium, and the coffee-rooms and inn parlours were full of folks eagerly occupied in discussing the one absorbing topic. "The town was crowded in an unprecedented manner," records a contemporary writer. The Commission, which reassembled the following day, had twenty-one prisoners to try, and no less than 300 jurymen had been summoned, together with 268 Crown witnesses. This was "stifling the plot" with a vengeance! But besides these supernumeraries there were the great officers of the law— the four Judges, the AttorneyGeneral, the Solicitor-General, two eminent and learned Serjeants, and six barristers.

Early on Wednesday morning part of the prisoners were again brought over firom Nottingham, and a post-chaise accompanied them loaded with the pikes, guns, and other weapons of the rebels. In the afternoon the Judges attended divine service at All Saints Church, the Sheriff's chaplain preaching firom the appropriate text, Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil." The interior

«

of the County Hall, or Assize Court, had been entirely rearranged to meet the anticipated press for accommodation. The building was crowded with the ^lite who had flocked in from adjoining counties, and, in fact, from every part of the land. The Grand Jury was emparmelled from the leading county fiunilies, with Lord George Augustus Cavendish (brother of the Duke of Devonshire) as foreman. At 2.30 the proceedings began.

As already mentioned, the Government had compassed thdr intention of elevating this aflair into national importance, and were likewise bent upon making it serve as an impressive warning. At the same time they prudently recollected that laughter lies very near to tears, and that the irreverent observations of some malcontent scribe might easily turn their tragedy into a screaming £uce even before the jury could be dismissed. Accordingly, an aimouncement was made by Chief Baron Richards prohibiting any report of the trials from being published until the whole should be terminated. The papers on both sides, however, disregarded this injunction to some extent, subjecting themselves to severe censure in consequence. But stringent as the precautions were to keep the trial up to a high sentimental level, it was impossible to ignore its glaring incongruity compared with some earlier State trials. With the trial of Lord William Russell, or the impeachment of Warren Hastings, for instance, it might have several things in common — the emmeiKre of the Judges, the eloquence of the speakers, and the brilliance of die onlookers. But what of the central figures around which the pageant moved? — the smock-frocked subverters of the empire!

Undeniably the game was poor, and the tale of the hunt is scarcely worth telling. The hearing lasted ten days, and the Attorney-General in his opening speech gave an able risumi of the law of treason, carrying the Court back to the reign of Edward HI., and then leading it forward over the intervening centuries. Brandreth was tried first, and the evidence against him was overwhelming: witness after witness proved his every movement from the Sunday till the Wednesday morning. There were but two witnesses called for the defence, and together they hardly uttered a score words; but what they testified was an unconscious sarcasm on the whole proceeding— one proved that the prisoner had been a pauper, the other spoke as to his previous good character. Mr. Denman (afterwards the celebrated Lord Justice), the junior counsel for the defence, caught the spirit of the thing as it appealed to an outsider. In the dock stood the Nottingham Captain, with ferocious visage and black stubby beard, and, pointing at him, counsel


quoted fix)in Lord Byron's "Corsair," then the poem of the

hour:—

But who that chief? his name on every shore Is fiuned and feared— they ask and know no more, With these he mingles not but to command — Few are his words, but keen his eye and hand.

And then, turning on the Court, he made the most obvious enquiry:—

Who was it that sent Brandreth from Nottingham to delude these unfortunate men, to inflame their understandings, and to lead them to acts of violence and outrage? There is something here concealed, there is something behind the curtain.

And subsequently, at the trial of Ludlam, he returned to the same argument:—

Why did not counsel for the Crown bring forward the evidence of the previous meetings? ... It was known the country was in a very distressed condition, and upon that condition wicked and artful men were but too likely to operate, with a view to produce disturbances. . . . But the principal author xA these disturbances was kept out of view. The unfortunate Captain, who was but himself an instrument, was brought forward, while his employer was invisible.

The prosecution had been careful not to introduce Oliver. It was feared that the advisers of the prisoners would endeavour to prove that one Crabtree, who had been in association with some of the rebels, was really Oliver \ so the real Simon Pure was brought to Derby while the trial was in progress, and privately shown to the witnesses as Mr. Crabtree, who all agreed that he was not the Mr. Crabtree they had met at Pentrich!

The verdict was easy to forecast All the prisoners were found guilty of high treason, and on Saturday, October 25, were placed in the dock for the last time. They had conducted themselves throughout the long hearing with indifference, and (with the exception of Brandreth, who was undoubtedly guilty of homicide) probably regarded their offence as a bad case of "drunk and disorderly." When severally asked if they had anything to say, Brandreth answered characteristically, "Let me address you in the words of Our Saviour, 'If it be possible let this cup pass from me, but not my will but your lordships' be done.'" Chief Baron Richards put on the black cap amid profound silence. It seemed incredible that such a witless band could be taken altogether seriously. Yet they were. Brandreth, the ambitious pauper, and Turner, Ludlam and George Weightman, his lieutenants, were severally sentenced to die the old savage death of traitors, to be "drawn on a hurdle to the place of execution, and be there severally hanged by the neck until you be dead; and that afterwards your heads shall be severed from your bodies and

your bodies, divided into four quarters, shall be disposed of as His Majesty shall direct ** As for the remainder, some were transported and others set at liberty.

• • • • •

November 7 was the date fixed for the carrying out of the sentences. In the meantime the extreme punishment of the law was commuted in Weightman's case to transportation for life, and the bulk of the public had hopes that the death penalty would not be inflicted upon at least two of the others.

Brandreth continued to maintain his cool demeanour, and all efforts to draw from him particulars of his past history failed. He seems, too, to have been regarded as a sort of outsider by his fellow unfortunates, who now frequently met together in the chapel and exercise ground. The poor wretches, old neighbours as they were, wept and condoled with one another, and seemed to lay the blame upon Bacon (who had escaped with transportation) for bringing them into this trouble. Bacon it will be remembered was the Pentrich man who had made Oliver's acquaintance in Yorkshire. The Nottingham Captain betrayed none of these weaknesses, and, but for the remark that "Oliver has brought me to this," which fell from his lips once or twice, he reproached nobody. His garment might be rough and his countenance ferocious, but in spite of all his crimes there was somethmg remarkable about the man. He was a turbulent personality, whom Charles Kingsley, for instance, would have delighted to study. The day before his execution he wrote a letter to his wife, wliich we extract in full. It is written in a firm hand, and is a singularly simple and dignified epistle:—

My beloved Wife,— This is the morning before I suffer. I have sat down to write my last lines to you, hoping that my soul wiU shortly be at rest in Heaven, through the redeeming blood of Christ I feel no fear in passing through the shadow of death to eternal life, so I hope you will take the promise of God as I have to your own soul, as we may meet in Heaven, where every sorrow will cease, and all will be joy and peace. My beloved, I received a letter this morning, with a pound note in it, which I leave for you in the jailor's hands, with the other things which will be sent to you, as I shaU mention before I have done. This is the account of what I send you:— One work bag, two balls of worsted and one of cotton, and a handkerchief, an old pair of stockings and shirt, and the letter I received from my beloved sister, with the foUowing sum of money, £1 1 21. *jd,: this I suppose will be sent in a packet to you by some means. My dearly beloved wife, this is the last correspondence I can have with you, so you will make 3rourself as easy as you possibly can, and I hope God will Uess you and comfort you as He hath me: and so my blessing attend you and the children, and the blessmg of God be with you all now and evermore. Adieu! adieu to all for ever.— Your most affectionate husband, J. Brandrbth.

Both Sheriff and Governor were not a little perplexed in their preparations for the execution: the task of beheading three men was not a pleasant one, and they endeavoured, though unsuccessfully, to get out of it. They, however, got the quartering remitted by royal warrant

At ten o'clock in the morning of the &teful day a detachment of the Enniskillen Dragoons was marched into the town to regulate the traffic, while a special force of police were requisitioned to keep back the crowd and check possible disturbance. A vast mob assembled outside the gaol, and, during a long wait, occupied themselves by inspecting the gibbets, blocks, axes, knives, and other gruesome paraphernalia. Inside the prison male&ctors and officials were engaged in despatching the routine of the law: the Sheriff, in formal phrase, called on the gaoler to produce the bodies; the bodies were produced in solemn order; fetters were knocked off, and others with convenient locks, suitable for dead bodies, were fitted on instead; then came the hurdle, on which each of the wretches were dragged for a last ride round the yard; and finally the procession headed out into the free air and foced the crowd. The doomed men were hurried up the ladder. Turner calling out wildly, "This is all Oliver and the Government!" A few minutes after their stiff corpses were dangling from the gibbets.

The next process in this horrible public spectacle was the beheading. After the bodies had been left hanging for half an hour they were cut down and laid with their necks upon the block. The Clay Cross collier who had been employed to wield the axe faltered as he struck the first blow, and the six thousand spectators groaned and shuddered as an assistant stepped forward and finished the mutilation with a knife. The hangman then seized the head by its hair, and, marching round the scaffold, cried, "Behold the head of the traitor, Jeremiah Brandreth!" The same performance was repeated over the other bodies. The overwrought crowd hissed, hooted, and finally dispersed in a panic, it bemg rumoured the dragoons were riding down upon them. The mangled remains of the conspirators were put into coffins and buried in one grave in St Werburgh's Churchyard. The block is still preserved as a memento in the prison, and, though stored in a dry place, the blood is reputed to be still moist upon it: tradition asserts that it will always remain so. Among those who witnessed this, the last execution for treason, was the poet Shelley, who wrote an indignant protest against the conduct of the authorities.

JOHN HYDE.
