# Cato Street Conspiracy

Also in Old Stories Retold

https://archive.org/details/authentichistory00wilkiala/page/n5/mode/2up
An authentic history of the Cato-Street conspiracy; with the trials at large of the conspirators, for high treason and murder; a description of their weapons and combustible machines, and every particular connected with the rise, progress, discovery, and termination of the horrid plot. With portraits of the conspirators, taken during their trials, by permission, and other engravings
by Wilkinson, George Theodore; Great Britain. Central Criminal Court; Thistlewood, Arthur, 1770-1820, defendant; Ings, James, d. 1820, defendant; Brunt, John Thomas, 1782?-1820, defendant; Tidd, Richard, 1775?-1820, defendant; Davidson, William, 1786-1820, defendant

Publication date [1820]

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0002647/18200225/009/0002?browse=true
Statesman (London) - Friday 25 February 1820

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002634/18200225/021/0004
London Chronicle - Friday 25 February 1820

Friday, February 25.

HIGH TREASON,
CONSPIRACY, AND MURDER.

We have seldom had more important information to lay before the Public than on the present occasion. The existence of a treasonable conspiracy, of a most atrocious character, has, we understand, been known to Government for some time past. Tuesday the first blow, it is said, was to have been struck by an attack upon his Majesty's Ministers when assembled at a Cabinet Dinner at Earl HARROWBY's, in Grosvenor-square. It is supposed that Earl HARROWBY's was fixed upon, because being nearer the outlet from London than the residence of any other of the Cabinet Ministers (Lord WESTMORLAND's excepted, who lives in the same square) escape out of town after the attempt had been made, would have been more easy. Be this as it may, the conspirators, as soon as they had ascertained that the Cabinet dinner was to be held there, lost no time in arranging their dreadful and diabolical project. The place chosen to arrange finally their proceedings, to collect their force, and to arm themselves, was near the Edgware-road—John-street is a short distance on the road, and intersected by another street, called Cato-street. Cato-street is rather an obscure street, and inhabited by persons in an humble class of life; it runs from John-street into Queen-street, and is parallel with Newham-street. It is open at one end for the admission of carriages, but is closed by posts at the other. The premises occupied by the conspirators consisted of a three-stall stable, with a loft above, in a very dilapidated condition. They are, we understand, the property of General WATSON, and have been recently in the possession of an old servant of his, who had lately turned cow keeper. From this man, who had been engaged by some of the diabolical crew whose machinations have been so happily discovered. The people in Cato-street were utterly ignorant that the stable was let until Wednesday, when several persons were seen to go in and out, and carefully to lock the door after them. Some of these individuals carried sacks and parcels of various descriptions. For two or three hours previous to the entrance of the stable, the Police officers were on the spot, making their observations, but still no suspicion was excited of the real object of their attack; and so well was the plan of surprise laid, that until the discharge of fire-arms was heard, every thing remained perfectly secret. In consequence of this information Mr. BIRNIE, under the direction of the Secretary of State for the Home Department, proceeded between seven and eight o'clock last night, accompanied by twelve of the Bow-street patrole to the place which had been pointed out as the rendezvous of the conspirators, with a warrant to apprehend them. The rendezvous was a sort of hay loft over some coach-houses in Cato-street, John-street, Edgware road, and the only approach to this receptacle of treason was by a narrow ladder which would admit of only one person ascending it at a time. RUTHVEN, a principal Bow-street officer, led the way, and he was followed by ELLIS, SMITHERS, SURMAN, and others of the patrole. On the door being opened, about twenty-seven or thirty men were seen within, all armed in some way or other; and, for the most part, they were apparently engaged either in charging fire-arms, or in girding themselves in belts similar to those worn by the military. There were tables about the room, on which lay a number of cutlasses, bayonets, pistols, sword-belts, pistol-balls in great quantities, ball cartridges, &c. As the officers entered the room, the conspirators all started up, when RUTHVEN, who had been furnished with a warrant from the Magistrates, exclaimed—"We are peace officers! lay down your arms!" In a moment all was confusion. A man, whom RUTHVEN describes as the notorious *Arthur Thistlewood*, opposed himself to the officers, armed with a cut and thrust sword of unusual length. RUTHVEN attempted to secure the door, and ELLIS, who had followed him into the room, advanced towards the man, and presenting his pistol, exclaimed, "Drop your sword, or I'll fire instantly!" The man brandished his sword with increased violence, when SMITHERS, the other patrole, rushed forward to seize him, and on the instant Thistlewood stabbed him to the heart. Poor SMITHERS fell into the arms of his brother officer ELLIS, exclaiming GOD "Oh!" and in the next instant was a corpse! Whilst this deed was doing the lights were extinguished, and a desperate struggle ensued, in which many of the officers were severely wounded. SURMAN, one of the patrole, received a musket ball on the temple, but fortunately it only glanced along the side of his head, tearing up the scalp in its way. WESTCOTT had four balls passed through his hat; WRIGHT had a still more narrow escape, as a sword actually passed through his shirt, and flannel jacket, .. TO DO - LOTS MORE