# Despard Plot

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002408/18021119/013/0002
Morning Herald (London) - Friday 19 November 1802

CHARGE of TREASON.

It is with the utmost regret we find, that the report which we alluded to yedterday, proves but too well founded, and that the nature of the condpiracy was of the most atrocious and shocking description. Colonel DESPARD appears to have been at the head of the Plot, the discovery of which happily occasioned by a discharged Serjeant of the Guards, to whom the Colonel had attempted to administer a treasonable oath, giving intimation of the infamous design to the Chief Magistrate of Bow-street. Sir RICHARD FORD, in consequence, immediately issued a warrant, and *Revitt*, one of the Bow-street Officers, at the head of a strong party of the London, Surrey, and Kent Patroles, in virtue of it, proceeded on Tuesday night, about a quarter after nine, to the Oakley Arms, in Oakley-street, Lambeth, where they found Colonel DESPARD, and thirtytwo labouring men and soldiers, English, Irish, and Scotch, the whole of whom they took into custody. On the following morning they were all taken before the Sitting Magittrates at Union Hall, who were assisted on the occasion by Sir RICHARD FORD. The examination lafted nearly eight hours, the result of which was, that the Colonel was committed to the County Gaol; twelve of his low associates, six of whom were soldiers, were sent to Tothill Fields Bridewell, and twenty to the New Prison, Clerkenwell. Ten other persons, who had been found in a different room, and who appeared to have no concern in the business, were discharged.

Yesterday afternoon, at one o'clock, Col. DESPARD, heavily ironed, accompanied by his wife, and one of the soidiers, was brought to Lord PELHAM'S Office, at Whitehall, where several of the Cabinet Minitters were assembled. He underwent an examination of two hours and a half, and at half past three was cornmited to Newgate for trial. Several more soldiers belonging to the Guards are said to have been apprehended, and committed prison.

The charge against the Colonel is, for having administered a secret oath to divers persons, binding them to an active co-operation in the performance of certain treasonable and murderous practices, and this association is said to consist of several divisions. The leading feature of the conspiracy is of so shocking a description, that we cannot mention it without pain and horror. The life of our beloved SOVEREIGN, it appears, was to be attempted on Tuesday next, by a division of the conspirators, while the remainder were to attack the Tower and other public places. It is difficult to imagine what the conspirators could haVe promised themselves from the perpetration of so atrocious a deed, from the execution of so mad and abominable a project. Foliy and wickedness must have combined in the devising of so foul and extraordinary a proceeding. We are unwilling, at present, to give full expression to our feelings on the occasion. In this stage of the business, prudence forbids us to enter into farther particulars, but in our next we shall probably be more at liberty to expose all the circumstances relating to so diabolical a plot.
